Introduction to …
The Writing Road to Reading
… a total language arts program
 ii
 iii
Understanding the Guide’s Design
Four color-coded sections parallel the typical actions of classroom teachers and home educators:
Planning an Integrated Language Arts Lesson (P=gold section), Delivering an Integrated Language Arts Lesson (D=red
section), Assessing Skills Mastery (A=blue section), and Evaluating Skills Mastery (E=green section).
1.		
Planning an Integrated Language Arts Lesson (P=gold section) explains what to teach by setting forth instructional
objectives of two types. A lesson objective is what a student should know or be able to do by the end of the lesson. A grade-
level objective is what students should know or be able to do by the end of the year. Spalding lesson objectives are pacing
guides to ensure that grade-level objectives are met. Blank forms are provided to enable you to differentiate instruction to
meet individual student’s needs.
Spelling, writing, and reading objectives are provided for Academic Days, that is instructional days, not holidays or field
trips. Each student’s objective includes the content to be learned (e.g., phonograms, verbs, elements of literature) and the
student’s behavior (e.g., say and write, compose, identify) that determines whether the student has mastered the content
or can perform the skill.
After each objective there is a code (e.g., M/CK/C) that reminds you to always model new objectives, ask basic and higher-
level questions that check for understanding, then coach as students attempt the task. Beside the student objectives are
Teaching Tips. Twenty days of objectives are followed by 28 weeks of objectives.
Your day will be composed of three integrated, mutually reinforcing lessons: spelling, writing, and reading.
Spelling Objectives teach and reinforce students’ knowledge of phonemic awareness, systematic phonics, and
vocabulary - the first three research-based components identified in the National Reading Panel Report (NRP,
2000). Spelling objectives begin with the sounds of spoken high-frequency words, followed by the symbols that
represent those sounds. Then, daily oral and written phonogram reviews prepare students for spelling dictation
and reading words for spelling and for reading. Lastly,
students learn syllabication and rule application.
Writing Objectives teach meaning and usage of
vocabulary, capitalization, punctuation, grammar
(including parts of speech), affixes, sentence construction,
and composition. Writing objectives always begin with
vocabulary development, i.e., students compose oral/
written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage
of unfamiliar Spelling/Vocabulary (S/V) Words. Other
objectives introduced each day are applied with the week’s
S/V words. Composition objectives (using the writing
process) conclude each lesson.
Reading Objectives develop fluent and expressive
reading and teach comprehension strategies - the last
two NRP components. These are integrated with literary
appreciation and elements of three basic types of writing.
Knowledge and skills acquired in these objectives are
applied to reading literature and content area text.
Phonemic Awareness
Systematic Phonics
High Frequency Vocabulary
SPELLING
Literary Appreciation
Text Structure
Mental Actions
READING
High Frequency Vocabulary
Sentence Construction
Compositions
WRITING
THE SPALDING METHOD
Philosophy
Methodology
 iv
2.		
Delivering an Integrated Language Arts Lesson (D=red section) explains
how to teach the content. The Spalding Method combines an educational
philosophy with a methodology consisting of time-tested principles of learning
and instruction that are applied across the curricula. Delivering defines
explicit, interactive, and diagnostic instruction and describes the teacher-
student interaction required when teaching any new skill. The pages devoted to
instruction of each language arts skill follow this pattern:
A brief description of the skill or concept.
A research quote that explains why that skill is important.
Instructional Strategies for teaching the skill.
Procedures that include teacher-student dialogues.
Once you understand the importance of each skill and commit the procedures to memory, teaching the objectives is easy.
Each week you will assess your students’ progress.
3.		
Assessing Skills Mastery (A=blue section) explains how to test all students and provides directions and forms for
assessing spelling, writing, and reading to monitor students’ progress daily, weekly, and monthly.
Following these assessments, you will evaluate data so you can differentiate instruction to meet individual student’s needs.
4.		
Evaluating Skills Mastery (E=green section) explains how to use
the information from the spelling, writing, and reading assessments to
differentiate instruction. Strategies, procedures, and tips enable you to
challenge the student who learns easily and help the student who has
difficulty.
Read the instructional strategies and procedures in the Planning and Delivering
sections before beginning Spalding’s Writing Road to Reading. You are on your
way to being a great Spalding teacher.
Contact Spalding Education International (SEI), a non-profit organization,
at 623-434-1204 for additional training opportunities and support or visit SEI
website <www.spalding.org> and post or view questions on the Forum.
CONTINUOUS
PROGRAM
IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING
DELIVERING
ASSESSING
EVALUATING
Spalding Spelling Assessment List
Name Date
Spalding Spelling Assessment List , cont.
# Correct Grade Status S/V Section
 v
WhyThe Writing Road to Reading Program Works
As a comprehensive, multisensory integrated language arts program for achieving reading proficiency, The
Writing Road to Reading (WRTR) is:
Instructionally sound, providing systematic instruction in phonemic
awareness, systematic phonics, vocabulary, fluency, and text comprehension as
required by state and Common Core standards.
Designed for differentiated instruction, equipping teachers with
a wealth of resources, diagnostic tools, and interventions needed
to support the learning of general, special education, and Limited
English Proficiency (LEP) students within the same classroom.
Historically successful, producing clear results for thousands of teachers and home
educators since its inception in the 1950s.
Accompanied by a variety of high quality professional development opportunities,
supporting district and school efforts to comply with federal High, Objective, Uniform State
System of Evaluation (HOUSSE) provisions.
50+
MORE THAN HALF
A CENTURY OF
RESEARCH-VALIDATED
RESULTS
Based on solid research, transforming research findings into effective classroom
practices so children can quickly become fluent, thoughtful readers.
DOMAIN #3
PRINCIPLES OF
SKILL LEARNING
DOMAIN #1
PRINCIPLES OF
READING PROCESS
DOMAIN #2
PRINCIPLES OF
READING
DEVELOPMENT
DOMAIN #4
PRINCIPLES OF
EFFECTIVE
INSTRUCTION
 vi
WhyThe Writing Road to Reading Program Works, cont.
Evidence-Based Components
The Writing Road to Reading program teaches children skills and practices most crucial to the development of
early reading success.
Phonemic Awareness: Hearing Sounds in Spoken Words
Systematic Phonics: Linking Sounds and Letters with Printed Words
The Writing Road to Reading:
 		Incorporates phonemic awareness training within daily spelling routines using high-
frequency words.
 		Provides regular teacher-led and independent practice for the following phoneme
manipulation tasks:
Identifying individual sounds in spoken words.
Segmenting spoken high-frequency words into individual sounds.
Counting sounds within spoken words.
Blending sounds into spoken words.
Recognizing initial sounds, then ending sounds, and finally middle (medial)
sounds.
Identifying same and then different sounds in spoken words and rhymes.
The Writing Road to Reading:
 		Uses a systematic approach to help children quickly master saying and writing the 70
symbols (phonograms) that represent 45 speech sounds.
 		Includes daily oral and written phonogram reviews to reinforce phonics skills.
 Equips children to spell accurately and to decode unfamiliar words by applying
phonics skills to reading text.
 		Connects speech to print with a unique and time-tested marking system.
 		Employs daily spelling dictation to lay the groundwork for segmenting spoken
words and blending phonograms into high-frequency regular and irregular words
(important prerequisites for faster success with reading).
 		Integrates precise handwriting techniques with sound-symbol relationships as a
multisensory bridge between essential phonics skills and their practical application for
writing and reading.
 Provides opportunities to apply newly learned and reinforced phonics skills through
reading words by sound or syllable.
 vii
Vocabulary: Building a Mental Lexicon of Words Encountered in Text
Fluency: Developing Automatic and Expressive Reading
The Writing Road to Reading:
 Uses high-frequency core vocabulary words as the foundation for vocabulary instruction.
 		Teaches word parts as well as usage and meanings.
		Coaches children to use these words to construct oral and then written sentences in
preparation for reading.
 		Extends vocabulary through use of fine literature and extensive independent reading.
The Writing Road to Reading:
 Structures the development of fluency skills with the regular use of proven strategies to
help automate the reading process such as:
Developing automatic word recognition as children read new words used in
normal speech – a critical prerequisite for reading text fluently with comprehension.
Modeling intonation, expression, and fluent reading.
Providing specific and immediate teacher feedback as students read orally to develop
accuracy, proper expression, and speed in daily reading lessons.
 		Monitors students’ fluency progress with teacher-administered Oral Reading Assessments.
The Writing Road to Reading:
 		Incorporates five proven comprehension strategies that build solid text comprehension skills:
Self-monitoring of comprehension while listening and reading.
Making connections between prior knowledge and text.
Predicting author’s purpose, type of writing, as well as likely outcomes and events.
Categorizing information by using graphic organizers, outlines, and sequencing
diagrams.
Summarizing text and identifying stated and deriving implied main ideas.
 		Provides specific, immediate feedback as children use these strategies to comprehend text.
 		Assesses students on multiple levels using strategies and questioning techniques
recommended by the NRP and found in high stakes testing.
 Uses cooperative learning activities to check for understanding.
Text Comprehension: Using Strategies to Gain Meaning from Text
 viii
WhyThe Writing Road to Reading Program Works, cont.
Research-Based Domains
The Writing Road to Reading programis built upon four major research domains related to reading, basic skills
mastery, and effective instruction.
PHONEMIC
AWARENESS
SENTENCE
STRUCTURE
(SYNTACTIC PROCESS)
TEXT
COMPREHENSION
(SEMANTIC
PROCESS)
VOCABULARY
(LEXICAL PROCESS)
SPATIAL
PLACEMENT
SOUND-SYMBOL
RELATIONSHIPS
(DECODING)
LETTER
RECOGNITION
FEATURE
RECOGNITION
EXPLORATION
MODELING
REFLECTION SCAFFOLDING
AND FADING
ARTICULATION
COACHING
COLLINS
COGNITIVE
APPRENTICESHIP
TASK
ANALYSIS
ATTENTION
MANAGEMENT
PRACTICE TO
AUTOMATICITY
STAGE 0
PREREADING
(PRE-K, K)
BIRTH-AGE 6 AGES 7-8
AGES 6-7 AGES 9-13
STAGE 2
CONFIRMATION
& FLUENCY
(GRADES 2-3)
STAGE 3
READING FOR
INFORMATION
(GRADES 4-8)
STAGE 1
DECODING
(GRADES 1-2)
Domain #4: Effective Instruction
Domain #3: Skill Learning
Domain #1: Reading Process Domain #2: Reading Development
 ix
Differentiated Instruction
With its diagnostic approach to the essential components of reading, The Spalding Method helps teachers easily
create learning plans for individual children and classroom subgroups using proven instructional techniques.
Consistent routines to meet the challenges of coordinating instruction in a
multiple-needs classroom
Well-constructed pacing guides and templates to differentiate instruction to
meet individual student’s needs
Interdisciplinary focus to provide opportunities for children to apply
reading skills across subject areas
Multisensory techniques to enhance skill retention and
provide extended learning opportunities for all children
A variety of diagnostic tools integrated into daily, weekly, and monthly
classroom activities to identify children falling behind as well as those in need
of challenge
CONTINUOUS
PROGRAM
IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING
DELIVERING
ASSESSING
EVALUATING
 94
Planning
Writing
For SCV objective 3, use
the Personal Pronouns
poster, column 1 for help in
identifying singular pronouns.
For SCV objective 3, use the
Spalding Word Analysis CD to
identify parts of speech.
Academic Week 10 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words may, today, boy, say, play, cool, feed, green, oil, paint
(C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ay, ai, oy, oi (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days
1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of sh, th, ow, ay, ai, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, ar, vowels, and c, g, s, y
(C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4). 
3. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-2).
4. Read (say) and write th, ow, ay, ai, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, ar, and vowels; analyze/
evaluate handwriting based on the day’s focus (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and reading (C:
Days 1-4). 
2. Identify beginning and ending and vowel sounds from PA objective 1 (C:
Days 2-3). 
3. Orally produce words that rhyme with may, ball, cold and explain why they rhyme
(C: Days 1-3). 
4. Define syllable as a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a single
impulse of the voice (C: Days 1-2).
5. Explain that we often use ay to say ā at the end of a base word, e.g., today, may (r.
18) (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
6. Explain syllable division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for today
(r. 18), may (r. 18), cool, oil, paint, tall (r. 17), gold (r. 19) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative and interrogative sentences that demonstrate usage and
meaning of may, say, today, green (M/CK/C: Days 1-5).
2. Compose oral interrogative sentences using question words when, why, how to
begin a sentence, e. g., “When is your birthday? Why is the little boy sad? How are you
today?” (M/CK/C: Days 2-4).
3. Identify nouns, action verbs, pronouns, and adjectives: today (n), boy (n), she
(p), say (v), he (p), play (n/v), feed (n/v), green (adj), oil (n/v), red (adj), good
(adj) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Explain that adding the suffix (ending) s to nouns means more than one person,
place, or thing; add s to bed, boy, top, street, hand (M/CK/C: Days 2-3).
5. Explain that an adverb adds to a verb by describing when the action happened;
identify adverbs in oral sentences, e.g., “The big man runs today. The big man runs
now.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4).
Spelling
For SP objective 4, have
children write all phonograms
in columns after multi-letter
phonograms have been
introduced. Have children
analyze/evaluate their
handwriting based on each
day’s focus.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For HFV objectives 2-4 and 6,
continue to use Primary Rule
Page 1 poster Parts 1-2 to
reinforce consonants, vowels,
and rules 1-6.
For HFV objective 3, example
rhyming words for may: day,
say, pay, way; for ball: fall,
hall, tall, wall; for cold: fold,
gold, hold, sold.
For HFV objectives 5-6,
introduce rule 18; emphasize
rules 17, 18, and 19 to prepare
for spelling dictation.
Tips
Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist
Name Date:
Story/Passage: Grade:
Accuracy
Reads words that are there
Omits sounds/syllables/words
Inserts/sounds/syllables/words
Decodes unfamiliar words easily
Mispronounces sounds frequently
Has difficulty blending sounds
Decodes unfamiliar words
inconsistently
Does not attempt to decode words
Fluency
Reads words, phrases, sentences
without hesitation
Reads words slowly
Reads words consecutively
Phrasing
Reads words together that go together
to convey meaning
Ignores punctuation
Inconsistent response to punctuation
Intonation
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
sentences
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
character expression
Reads in a monotone
Enunciation
Articulates speech sounds distinctly
General Observations
Holds book too close
Holds book too far away
Volume too loud
Volume too soft
Lack confidence
 x
WhyThe Writing Road to Reading Program Works, cont.
Effective Professional Development
Spalding offers a variety of high-quality professional development opportunities to help districts, schools, and
teachers ensure the effectiveness of their early reading instruction:
 		Teacher training courses accredited by the International Multisensory Structured Language Education
Council (IMSLEC) and the International Dyslexia Association (IDA) that focus on the essential skills and
behaviors identified by the National Reading Panel (NRP) and the Knowledge and Practice Standards for Teachers of
Reading.
Multisensory Instruction of Language Arts, Part 1 provides
explicit instruction in spelling (including phonemic awareness,
handwriting, and phonics), sentence construction, literary
appreciation, listening and reading comprehension, and lesson
planning. Spelling is emphasized because the subskills of
reading are taught there in an integrated format – a unique
feature of The Spalding Method.
Multisensory Instruction of Language Arts, Part 2 emphasizes
literary appreciation, composition, text structure, and comprehension,
principles of learning and instruction, and lesson planning. Spelling
concepts taught in MILA 1 are reinforced and expanded.
 		Customized onsite professional development for teachers
 		Continuing education and ongoing teacher support
through periodic Spalding Certified Teacher Instructor
Seminars focused on best practices and research updates
 Ancillary professional development opportunities for school administrators, curriculum directors, grade-level leaders,
and instructional specialists at Leadership Conferences
 xi
The Writing Road to Reading
The Writing Road to Reading, the text for teaching The Spalding
Method, is a total language arts program that is effective with
both general and special education children and those for whom
English is not their first language. The Spalding Method provides
explicit, interactive, diagnostic, sequential, multisensory, and
integrated instruction in spelling, writing, listening, and reading
comprehension.
Spelling: Phonogram Cards
Spelling: Phonogram Sounds
This five-track CD helps teachers and students who have
difficulty hearing differences between speech sounds.
Used to teach phonics and automatic recognition of common letter/
sound correspondences for the 70 phonograms and 17 less-frequently
occurring phonograms. Coated cards are numbered in the order of
introduction and are available in two sizes for either whole- or small-
group instruction.
Phonogram
Sounds
12:01
1. Sounds of phonograms 1-26
2. Sounds of phonograms 27-45
3. Sounds of phonograms 46-58
4. Sounds of phonograms 59-70
5. Sounds of phonograms 71-87
 2013 Spalding Education International
A total language arts program
Instructional Resources for Teachers
Video of phonogram cards and sounds
on multiple tracks for students needing
additional phonogram practice.
 xii
Spelling: Feature and Letter Formation Posters
The coated Feature Formation poster illustrates how the clock face
and six features are used to form the 26 alphabet letters. The Letter
Formation poster shows letters that begin at two on the clock and
letters that begin with a line. They are available in two sizes for whole-
and small-group instruction: 18” x 24” and 11.5” X 15.”
Page 1 shows children how to apply rules dealing with
consonants, vowels, and five kinds of silent final e’s
categorized for teaching rules that govern phonogram
pronunciations.
Page 2 is a lined, specially coated poster for adding words
under the appropriate headings for the five spellings of the
sound /er/.
Page 3 is used to improve spelling by illustrating how to add
suffixes that begin with vowels to one syllable words.
Page 4 illustrates how to add endings that begin with a vowel
to words that end in silent e.
Rule posters 1, 3, and 4 are coated. Rule poster 2 is laminated
for writing words.
Spelling: Primary Rule Posters
Spelling: Alphabet Strips
Coated upper- and lower-case alphabet letters in Spalding font. Includes
numbers and punctuation marks.
Instructional Resources for Teachers, cont.
 xiii
Writing: Level 1 Word Builder Cards
Useful for expanding children’s vocabulary by illustrating application
of prefixes and suffixes to high-frequency base words. Laminated
Level 1 Word Builder cards are typically used in kindergarten
through grade 2.
Writing: Parts of Speech Posters
These coated posters are a valuable aid for teaching
nouns, verbs, and pronouns. Noun and verb posters are
designed for use with dry-erase pen and eraser.
24” x 18” with pre-drilled holes to hang on an easel.
Set of 7 with instructions.
Verb Past Tense Part 2
Write i instead of
y and add ed
Write the
same word
Change a
phonogram sound

Erasable poster instructions: Use a dry erase marking pen. Clean with an eraser designed for dry erase surfaces. If markings don’t fully erase (or a permanent marker was accidentally used), the poster can be cleaned with a spray-on white board cleaner (or permanent marker remover) and a clean cloth.
Verb Past Tense Part 1
Add ed Change a
phonogram
Change a
word

Erasable poster instructions: Use a dry erase marking pen. Clean with an eraser designed for dry erase surfaces. If markings don’t fully erase (or a permanent marker was accidentally used), the poster can be cleaned with a spray-on white board cleaner (or permanent marker remover) and a clean cloth.
Noun Plurals Part 2
Write i instead of
y and add es
Write the
same word
Write v instead of
f and add s or es
Erasable poster instructions: Use a dry erase marking pen. Clean with an eraser designed for dry erase surfaces. If markings don’t fully erase (or a permanent marker was accidentally used), the poster can be cleaned with a spray-on white board cleaner (or permanent marker remover) and a clean cloth. 
Noun Plurals Part 1
Add s Add es, ren,
or en
Change
phonogram(s)

Erasable poster instructions: Use a dry erase marking pen. Clean with an eraser designed for dry erase surfaces. If markings don’t fully erase (or a permanent marker was accidentally used), the poster can be cleaned with a spray-on white board cleaner (or permanent marker remover) and a clean cloth.
Noun Categories
Person Place Thing Concept

Erasable poster instructions: Use a dry erase marking pen. Clean with an eraser designed for dry erase surfaces. If markings don’t fully erase (or a permanent marker was accidentally used), the poster can be cleaned with a spray-on white board cleaner (or permanent marker remover) and a clean cloth.
Additional Pronouns
Demonstrative Interrogative Indefinite

some
other
each
more
most
any
many
anything
another
one
nothing
all
both
few
something
everything
none
nobody
several
either
neither
everybody
everyone
Subject
who
what
which
Object
whom
what
which
Possessive
whose
this
that
these
those
Personal Pronouns
Subject Object Possessive Reflexive

Singular
1st I
2nd you
3rd he
she
it
Plural
1st we
2nd you
3rd they
Singular
1st me
2nd you
3rd him
her
it
Plural
1st us
2nd you
3rd them
Singular
1st my, mine
2nd your, yours
3rd his
her, hers
its
Plural
1st our, ours
2nd your, yours
3rd their, theirs
Singular
1st myself
2nd yourself
3rd himself
herself
itself
Plural
1st ourselves
2nd yourselves
3rd themselves
Spelling: Word Analysis CD
This data CD saves precious teacher’s time by
quickly sorting words by rules, parts of speech,
spelling lists, and syllable patterns, all categories
needed for the week’s spelling/vocabulary words.
All words listed in The Writing Road to Reading
Sections A-Z have been analyzed to expedite
lesson planning.
 xiv
Reading: Fine Literature and Text Structure Posters
These coated visual representations of the Attributes of Fine Literature and Elements of three basic types of writing make
abstract concepts concrete. Class set of 4: 18” x 24” (45.7 cm x 61.0 cm). Small set of 4: 12” x 16.”
Fine
Literature
Fine
Literature
Instructional Resources for Teachers, cont.
 xv
Reading: The Comprehension Connection
User’s Guide for McCall-Harby and McCall-Crabbs Book A
THE COMPREHENSION CONNECTION
User’s Guide
for
McCall-Harby
and McCall-Crabbs Book A
with
Passage Analyses and Answer Keys
McCall-
Harby
McCall-
Crabbs
Book A
Guide for teaching narrative, informative, and informative-narrative text
structure and five comprehension strategies using McCall-Harby and McCall-
Crabbs Book A.
A copy of short passages used for teaching informative and informative-
narrative text structure.
Reading: McCall-Harby Test Lessons in Primary Reading
Reading: McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in Reading Book A
A copy of short passages used for teaching narrative text structure.
 xvi
Reading: Mental Action Posters
Instructional Resources for Teachers, cont.
These coated mental action posters are a valuable
aid to help students identify and label five
mental actions (comprehension strategies) used
to comprehend what they read. Directions are
included.
Reorganizing and categorizing information
into new forms (e.g., lists, outlines) to use
for the immediate task or file for later use
Confirming or deriving the main idea using
stated information and information already
learned
2011, Spalding Education International www.spalding.org
REFORMATTING
MENTALLY
SUMMARIZING
MENTAL ACTIONS
Spalding in Action DVD: Kindergarten
Spalding in Action
Kindergarten-6th Grades
The Writing Road to Reading®
Integrated English Language Arts Lessons
in Kindergarten through Grade 6 that include . . .
Spelling Oral/Written Phonogram Review

Spelling Dictation/Reading Words Two Ways
Word Analysis Practice
Writing Sentence Construction

Grammar/Composition
Reading Text Structure/Mental Actions

Fluent, Expressive Reading
Spalding in Action for K-6th Grades
An integrated English language arts lesson is demonstrated at each grade, kinder-
garten through sixth grade, by a classroom teacher/coach using The Writing Road
to Reading. Each lesson includes instruction in scientifically-based components of
reading instruction: phonemic awareness, systematic phonics, vocabulary, syntax and
composition, reading comprehension, and fluency. Explicit, interactive, diagnostic
instruction that is sequential and multisensory is demonstrated. Integration of a
sound educational philosophy that includes principles of learning and instruction
in spelling, writing, and reading is provided in each DVD for consistency in teaching
throughout the grades.
Suggestions for use . . .
Professional development sessions for staff. At staff meetings, selected elements
1.
(e.g., OPR) may be viewed by entire staff to demonstrate skill development across
the grades.
Grade level meetings. Teachers can view their grade-level DVD to refine delivery
2.
and achieve greater consistency of instruction within their grade level.
Individual teachers. Teachers can view selected elements or all grade-level les-
3.
sons to improve their delivery or efficiency.
Homeschool parents. Parents can view grade-specific DVDs to learn how Spalding
4.
lessons are delivered.
 xvii
Baker, Alan Brown Rabbit’s Shape Book Kingfisher Books
Baker, Alan White Rabbit’s Color Book Kingfisher Books
Barton, Byron Boats		 HarperFestival
Barton, Byron Planes HarperFestival
Barton, Byron Trucks HarperFestival
Brown, Margaret Wise Goodnight Moon HarperCollins
Carle, Eric The Very Hungry Caterpillar Philomel Books
Cronin, Doreen Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type Simon & Schuster Books for
					 Young Readers
Dewdney, Anna Llama Llama Time to Share Viking Juvenile
Finn, Isobel The Very Lazy Ladybug Tiger Tales
Fleming, Candace Muncha, Muncha, Muncha Atheneum Books for
					 Young Readers
Fleming, Denise In the Tall, Tall Grass Square Fish
Fowler, Allan Life in a Pond Children’s Press
Galdone, Paul The Three Billy Goats Gruff Sandpiper
Gibbons, Gail Boat Book Holiday House
James, Simon My Friend Whale Walter Books Ltd.
Keats, Ezra Jack The Snowy Day Puffin
Krauss, Ruth The Carrot Seed HarperCollins
Lionni, Leo A Busy Year Knoph Books for Young
					 Readers
Lionni, Leo Frederick		 Dragonfly Books
Martin Jr., Bill Bill Martin’s Big Book of Poetry Simon & Schuster Books for
					 Young Readers
Numeroff, Laura Joffe If You Give a Mouse a Cookie HarperFestival
Penn, Audrey The Kissing Hand Tanglewood Press
Saunders-Smith, Gail The Farm Capstone Press
Schenk De Regniers, Beatrice May I Bring a Friend? Aladdin
Schulman, Janet 10th Century Children’s Poetry Treasury Knopf Books for Young
					 Readers
Snyder, Inez Apples Children’s Press
Snyder, Inez Carrots Children’s Press
Snyder, Inez Cranberries Children’s Press
Snyder, Inez Oranges Children’s Press
Snyder, Inez Tomatoes Children’s Press
Stead, Philip C. A Sick Day for Amos McGee Roaring Brook Press
Sturges, Philemon I Love Bugs HarperCollins			
Sturges, Philemon I Love Trains HarperCollins
Wood, Audrey The Napping House Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
Wood, Lily Bats		 Scholastic Inc.
These literature and informational text selections are used for teaching literary appreciation, text structure, and mental
actions. One copy of each book is recommended.
Reading: Teacher Resources for Direct Instruction
AUTHOR TITLE PUBLISHER
 xviii
Spelling: Spalding Paper
Three styles of 5/8” lined paper for developing letter
formation and spatial relationships:
Instructional Supplies for Children
Spelling: Spelling/Vocabulary Notebook
A sewn stiff-cover composition book (5/8” lines on 34 leaves) is used
to write high frequency words and teach phonics, spelling, English rule
structure, and vocabulary.
Vertical format with space: Lined with space at top
for children’s illustrations.
Horizontal Format: Lined for writing sentences
or narrative and informative paragraphs.
Vertical Format: Lined both sides for phonogram practice or
spelling quizzes.
Spelling: Clock Face Card
2
10
4
8
2013, Spalding Education International
This teaching aid reinforces the important points on the clock for
forming letters that begin at 2 on the clock. Children can identify the
reference points on the clock and the lines for writing. They can use
the clock face to practice tracing around the clock as they say the
directions for the letter formations (WRTR 45-47).
 xix
Children identify narrative, informative, and informative-narrative
text structure by selecting the appropriate coated card. Vivid colors
allow instant assessment of each child’s understanding. (Perforated)
Reading: Text Structure Cards
Reading: Mental Action Cards
Children select cards to indicate the mental actions they are using.
Five coated cards in bold colors help teachers assess use of mental
actions. (Perforated)
 xx
Author: Sarah Lapsley Illustrator: James Koenig Publisher: Spalding Education International
Reading: Spalding’s Learning to Read and Loving It Series 1 Leveled Readers
1. Sam and Puff Narrative 26 + sh, ee, th, ow
2. A Trip to the Park Narrative 30 + ou, oo, ch, ar
3. Ben Visits the Farm Narrative 34 + ay, ai, oy, oi
4. Mother Helps Tim Narrative 38 + er, ir, ur, wor, ear
5. Her First Nurse Works Early Narrative 38 + er, ir, ur, wor, ear
6. The Flying Fish Narrative 43 + ng, ea, aw, au, or
7. Grandma’s Helper Narrative 48 + ck, wh, ed
8. The New Suit Narrative 51 + ew, ui
9. Learning About Horses Informative 53 + oa, gu
10. Learning About Dogs Informative 55 + ph, ough
11. Learning About Cows Informative 57 + oe, ey
12. Learning About Sheep Informative 59 + igh, kn
13. Learning About Wild Cats Informative 61 + gn, wr
14. Learning About Birds Informative 63 + ie, dge
15. Learning About Deer Informative 65 + ei, eigh
16. Learning About Bears Informative 67 + ti, si, ci
17. Touring the Public Library Informative-Narrative 70 (selected)
18. A Visit to the County Fair Informative-Narrative 70 (selected)
19. A Tour of the Fire Station Informative-Narrative 70 (selected)
20. A Trip to the Animal Shelter Informative-Narrative 70 (selected)
Spalding’s Series 1 Leveled Readers are used to practice fluent and expressive reading. One book per student is
recommended. Additional recommended kindergarten books are listed on the SEI website <www.spalding.org>. Click on
Support, then Recommended Literature.
		
BOOK # AND TITLE TYPE OF WRITING PHONOGRAMS PRACTICED
Instructional Supplies for Children, cont.
 xxi
		
Appleton-Smith, Laura Bon Bon the Downtown Cow Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Frank the Fish Gets His Wish Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Jen’s Best Gift Ever Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Lin-Lin and the Gulls Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Meg and Jim’s Sled Trip Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Oh My! It Must Be the Sky! Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Pearl Learns a Lesson Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Shep The Sheep of Caladeen Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura Snail Hits the Trail Flyleaf
Appleton-Smith, Laura The Sunset Pond Flyleaf
Dr. Seuss Green Eggs and Ham Random House
Eastman, P. D. Are You My Mother? Random House
Eastman, P. D. Go, Dog, Go Random House
Flack, Marjorie and Wiese, Kurt The Story About Ping Grosset & Dunlap
Galdone, Paul The Gingerbread Boy Houghton-Mifflin
Galdone, Paul The Three Billy Goats Gruff Houghton-Mifflin
Hayden, Kate Astronaut Living in Space Dorling Kindersley
Krauss, Ruth The Carrot Seed Scholastic
Leaf, Munro The Story of Ferdinand Viking
Lopshire, Robert Put Me in the Zoo Random House
Platt, Richard Spiders’ Secrets Dorling Kindersley
Potter, Beatrice The Tale of Peter Rabbit F. Warne
Rey, H. A., and Margaret Curious George Houghton-Mifflin
Wallace, Karen A Bed for the Winter Dorling Kindersley
These children’s literature selections are recommended for enjoyment. Additional recommended kindergarten books are
listed on the SEI website <www.spalding.org>. Click on Support, then Recommended Literature.
Reading: Children’s Literature From Multiple Authors
AUTHOR TITLE PUBLISHER
 xxii
 xxiii
Research Results
A growing body of data shows that The Writing Road to Reading program produces consistently higher reading
scores.
2002-2004 Spalding vs. Non-Spalding NRT
Performance (Reading Grade 3)
NRT Percentile
State Average
50 60 70 80
District Non-Spalding
Schools
Spalding
Schools
Performance on the reading portion of state adopted norm-referenced tests (NRTs) at Arizona schools where The Spalding
Method is used as the primary reading program is typically 15-20 percentile points higher than that observed at non-
Spalding schools (SOURCE: SEI Annual Special Reports).
Tested Reading Levels for Classes in Grades 1-3
Using The Spalding Method
Grade Level (Actual)
Grade
Level
(Tested)
1
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2 3
In one study of over 120 classrooms in 20 schools across eight states, the tested reading levels of children taught The Spalding
Method in grades 1-3 was a minimum of two grade levels above their non-Spalding peers. These dramatic gains were
achieved regardless of variables such as school size, class size, and special education status (SOURCE: Aukerman, 1984, 541-
545).
 xxiv
MARY LOU FULTON COLLEGE OF EDUCATION
TECHNOLOGY BASED LEARNING AND RESEARCH
ASU SkySong
1475 N. Scottsdale Rd., Suite 200 Scottsdale, AZ 85257-3538
Phone # (480) 884-1694 Fax # (480) 884-1888
http://tblr.ed.asu.edu
FINAL SUMMARY REPORT: EVALUATION STUDY OF THE WRITING ROAD TO
READING
Gary Bitter, Mary Aleta White
Arizona State University
Arizona State University conducted a four-year quasi-experimental study (2006-2007 through
2009-2010) to validate the effectiveness of Spalding’s Writing Road to Reading program for
teaching reading to children from varied backgrounds and different types of schools.
To study teacher implementation, researchers collected data through classroom observations and
survey questionnaires. For student measures, researchers employed the Dynamic Indicators of
Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) as the measure to assess changes in students’ reading
skills. DIBELS tests were administered at the beginning, middle, and end of each school year.
Participants
This study was conducted in 5 experimental (Spalding) and 6 control schools, matched by
gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and language ability, with an average of 47 teachers and
an average of 1,000 students each year. Complete descriptions and information are provided in
Tables 1-7 in the complete report available on the research page at <www.spalding.org>. Classes
in the experimental group used the Spalding curriculum an average of 90 minutes each day,
while control classes used either Houghton Mifflin or Harcourt an average of 80 minutes each
day. Another analysis of reading achievement was available in the third-year study because all
second-grade students are required to complete the state’s norm-referenced achievement test,
TerraNova. The chart below represents a sample of the study students (three control and three
experimental schools) and their Normal Curve Equivalent (NCE) scores on the TerraNova
reading portion. As would be expected from reviewing the DIBELS scores, the Spalding
students’ NCE scores were significantly higher than the control students on the state test
(p <.01).
Chart 3: Student NCE reading scores from Spring, 09 AZ TerraNova exam
TerraNova Reading (09)
64.2%
47.7%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Experimental group Control group
 xxv
Pg. 2 of 2
As shown in Chart 4, additional analyses of the extent to which experimental students
experienced learning gains by the end of each grade level show that they exceeded the DIBELS
decision rules benchmarks for achievement each year (as well as at each testing period).
Unfortunately, since the middle of their second-grade year, the average control student is not
meeting the DIBELS assessment for low-risk scores. Their achievement level averages a score
approximately 5 points below the low risk threshold.
Chart 4: Overall year-end assessment scores compared to DIBELS decision rules benchmarks
*K, Spring 2007 is Phoneme Segmentation Fluency, all others are Oral Reading Fluency
In addition to measures of statistical significance, researchers frequently calculate and report
measures of practical significance, known as the effect size. This is a way to help educators
decide whether a statistically significant difference between programs translates into a
meaningful difference—one that would justify a program adoption for instance. Using the entire
treatment group, the effect size for Fall 2009 was .7; for Winter 2010 it was .6; and in Spring
2010 the effect size is .4. This means the intervention has a positive, medium effect (average of
0.54) on student achievement. Converting effect size to percentiles means the average student in
the Spalding sample, at the end of the year, scores higher than 69% of the control student sample.
Using longitudinal group scores, the effect size for Fall 2009 was .9; for Winter 2010 was .8; and
for Spring 2010 was .6. This means that the intervention has a large effect size (average of 0.78)
on student reading achievement. In converting effect size to percentiles, the average student in
the longitudinal Spalding group would score higher than 79% of the control student sample.
SUMMARY
According to the four-year results, students who used The Writing Road to Reading program
demonstrate higher and statistically significant learning as measured by DIBELS. Since both the
control groups and the experimental groups used detailed teacher guides evaluated by ADE for
research-based reading components, theoretically, they should have produced similar results.
This was not the case. The four-year findings strongly suggest that use of The Writing Road to
Reading program is an effective method for enhancing performance on critical early literacy
skills.
Overall Year-End Assessment Scores Compared to DIBELS Decision Rules Benchmarks
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
K* 1 2 3
Grade level
Exp ORF
Control ORF
DIBELS Benchmarks
 xxvi
Contributing Authors and Reviewers
SEI Editorial Advisory Board
Grade-Level Development and Review Team
Sally Baldenegro, Goodyear, AZ
Tracy Beresford, Glendale, AZ
Dixie Blanchard, Camp Verde, AZ
Jaclyn Campbell, Camp Verde, AZ
Jodi Cochran, Avondale, AZ
Pamela Courson, Phoenix, AZ
Debbie Denette, Goodyear, AZ
Jenny Derr, Chandler, AZ
Edith Dunn, Sun City, AZ
Erin Eroe, Glendale, AZ
Elise Ganade, Cottonwood, AZ
Lisa Gebbia, Phoenix, AZ
JoLinda Hardy, Anthem, AZ
Kim Hartwig, Chandler, AZ
Kitty Jalving, Camp Verde, AZ
Katie (Kathleen) Johnson, Peoria, AZ
Alison Jones, Gilbert, AZ
Kimberly Jones, Phoenix, AZ
Debra Jubb, Phoenix, AZ
Penny King, Phoenix, AZ
Nichole Kogel, Gilbert, AZ
Joyce LaCombe, Cottonwood, AZ
Sharon Lara, Camp Verde, AZ
Shirley Leach, Phoenix, AZ
Cindy Leek, Scottsdale, AZ
Samantha Linehan, Scottsdale, AZ
Brandy Lund, Camp Verde, AZ
Alecia Lundell, Peoria, AZ
Rachel MacDonald, Peoria, AZ
Kitty McDowell, Camp Verde, AZ
Sarah McKenzie, Chandler, AZ
Penny Mineck, Glendale, AZ
Susan Mitcoff, Surprise, AZ
Darla Palacio, Phoenix, AZ
Heather Pehl, Camp Verde, AZ
Jesse Price, Cornville, AZ
Dorothy Reese, Camp Verde, AZ
Gwena Roberts, Camp Verde, AZ
Brandi Rogers, Gilbert, AZ
Dee Dee Roper, Phoenix, AZ
Linda Rushing, Mesa, AZ
Lori Showers, Camp Verde, AZ
Amy Silverman, Phoenix, AZ
Nicolle Stearns, Glendale, AZ
Kathy Stock, Glendale, AZ
Lisa Thruston, Glendale, AZ
Pat Trotter, Phoenix, AZ
Tressa Wagner, Camp Verde, AZ
Barb Welchlin, Phoenix, AZ
Max Wennet, Cottonwood, AZ
Lisa Werden, Chandler, AZ
Victoria Wilber, Peoria, AZ
Andrea Wilhelm, Phoenix, AZ
Barry Wray, Glendale, AZ
Sydna Zilm, Mesa, AZ
Janie Carnal, Chair, SEI Executive Director for Educational Services and Executive Trainer, Prescott Valley, AZ
Pamela Courson, SEI Curriculum Specialist and Executive Trainer, Phoenix, AZ
Randall Eden, Product Marketing Consultant, UpSlope Solutions, LLC, Phoenix, AZ
Lisa Gebbia, Spalding Certified Teacher Instructor and 1st-Grade Teacher, Phoenix, AZ
McKenzie Hawkins, SEI Outreach Specialist and Executive Trainer, Phoenix, AZ
Betty Henson, SEI Curriculum Specialist and Executive Trainer, Scottsdale, AZ
Mary E. North, Ph. D., Advisor, Former SEI Director, Research and Curriculum, Glendale, AZ
Kelly Osburn, Spalding Certified Teacher Instructor and Executive Trainer, Mesa, AZ
Jennifer Pawlik, Spalding Certified Teacher Instructor and Executive Trainer, Chandler, AZ
Pat Perkins, SEI Curriculum Specialist and Executive Trainer, Glendale, AZ
Jim Sexton, SEI President and Chief Executive Officer, Dewey, AZ
Marcia Sielaff, SEI Editor and Advisor, Gilbert, Arizona
Debra Stoddard, SEI Executive Trainer and Director of Teacher Training and Development, Mesa, AZ
Carole Wile, Former SEI Director, Professional Development, Seattle, WA
Sydna Zilm, SEI Professional Development Specialist and Executive Trainer, Mesa, AZ

Planning
Kindergarten
Planning Integrated
Language Arts Instruction

Planning

Planning
TABLE OF CONTENTS
OVERVIEW OF THE WRITING ROAD TO READING.............................................................1-12
SPALDING’S LANGUAGE ARTS CIRCLE .................................................................... 2
THE SPELLING LESSON AT A GLANCE ................................................................................3
Phonemic Awareness: Phoneme Manipulation Tasks............................................................4
Systematic Phonics: Phonograms with Handwriting .............................................................4
Systematic Phonics: Rules of English Language Structure...................................................5
Vocabulary: High Frequency Words........................................................................................6
THE WRITING LESSON AT A GLANCE...................................................................................7
Sentence Construction with High-Frequency Vocabulary......................................................8
Composition with Text Comprehension.............................................................................8
THE READING LESSON AT A GLANCE...................................................................................9
Fluency: Literary Appreciation..............................................................................................10
Fluency: Automatic and Expressive Reading.......................................................................10
Text Comprehension: Text Structure.....................................................................................11
Text Comprehension: Mental Actions....................................................................................12
FRAMEWORK FOR DESIGNING LESSONS..........................................................13-18
STEP #1: SELECTING INSTRUCTIONAL OBJECTIVES AT THE CORRECT LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY....14
STEP #2: ASSIGNING INSTRUCTIONAL DELIVERY LEVEL(S) FOR EACH OBJECTIVE.....................15
STEP #3: ALIGNING INFORMATION, QUESTIONS, RESPONSES, ACTIVITIES (IQRA) ......................16
STEP #4: PREPARING THE INTRODUCTION AND CONCLUSION..................................................18
SCOPE AND SEQUENCE PART 1: PROGRAM OBJECTIVES.............................19-31
SPELLING GRADE-LEVEL OBJECTIVES..............................................................................20
WRITING GRADE-LEVEL OBJECTIVES................................................................................22
READING GRADE-LEVEL OBJECTIVES...............................................................................30
SCOPE & SEQUENCE PART 2: LESSON OBJECTIVES.....................................33-145
LESSON PLAN KEY...............................................................................................................33
TIME SCHEDULE...................................................................................................................33
CONSIDERATIONS FOR DIFFERENTIATED INSTRUCTION................................................33
IMPORTANT LESSON PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS........................................................34
WEEKS 1 - 4 INTEGRATED LANGUAGE ARTS LESSON OBJECTIVES: OVERVIEW.........35
SKILLS TRACE: SPELLING, WRITING, READING......................................................... 37-43
READING: SPALDING’S LEARNING TO READ AND LOVING IT LEVELED READERS......44
READING: CHILDREN’S LITERATURE FOR DIRECT TEACHING.......................................45
WEEKS 1 - 4 INTEGRATED LANGUAGE ARTS LESSON OBJECTIVES: DAILY........... 48-87
WEEKS 5 - 32 INTEGRATED LANGUAGE ARTS LESSON OBJECTIVES: WEEKLY... 88-143
DAILY INTEGRATED LANGUAGE ARTS LESSON OBJECTIVE TEMPLATE......................144
WEEKLY INTEGRATED LANGUAGE ARTS LESSON OBJECTIVE TEMPLATE..................145

Planning
 1
Planning
Overview of The Writing Road to Reading Program
Student achievement is maximized when
teachers’ professional decisions are based on a thorough
understanding of content, sound principles of learning and
instruction, and sensitivity to the child within his or her
learning environment. Empowered with this knowledge
and philosophy, teachers can design lessons that meet the
needs of the class in general, of gifted children who need
extra challenge, and of children with a variety of learning
challenges who need additional help.
The Spalding Method®
is a diagnostic teaching method.
This means that while teachers consider the physical and
mental well being of their children, they are continuously
observing and informally evaluating children’s
performance and behavior to plan the most effective
instruction. They compare individual achievement with
the grade-level spelling, writing, and reading curricula,
determine children’s instructional levels, and plan
appropriate lessons with sufficient practice activities.
Romalda Spalding believed that teaching is a constant
stream of professional decisions made before, during, and
after interaction with children. She wanted teachers to
be decision makers. The types of decisions that teachers
make on a regular basis when planning for instruction
include the following:
What content to teach;
How to teach it; and
What children will do to learn and to demonstrate that learning has occurred.
Spalding’s The Writing Road to Reading makes these planning decisions easy:
The lesson content (evidence-based instructional components) is listed in the Scope and Sequence, in the text, and in this
Guide.
How children progress from novice to skilled readers, how skills are acquired, and how to deliver effective instruction are
explained in the text.
How to plan effective lessons is described in detail in the text and in this section of the Teacher’s Guide.
 2
Planning
Spalding’s Language Arts Circle
Daily Language Arts Objectives are organized around the
Spalding Language Arts Circle. Each of the essential instructional
components recommended by the National Reading Panel (NRP)
are taught or reinforced in one or more of the lessons in the circle.
The time allotted to each lesson varies depending on the grade
and skill level of the class as well as the individual child. Initially,
in the primary grades, more time is devoted to the spelling lesson
because seven sub-skills of reading are taught there: phonemic
awareness, systematic phonics (which includes feature and letter
recognition, spatial placement, sound-symbols, language rules),
and a basic vocabulary. When children have automated their
performance on oral and written phonogram reviews and spelling
dictation procedures, more time is spent on writing and reading
lessons. At that point, each day’s spelling lesson should average
thirty to forty-five minutes with the remaining time divided
between writing and reading lessons.
This integrated language arts lesson plan is also effective in special education resource rooms or tutorial settings. Assuming a
one-hour resource or tutorial session, allow approximately thirty minutes for the spelling lesson because it is the foundation for
reading and writing. Plan about twenty minutes for oral sentence construction with vocabulary development to reinforce the skills
learned in spelling. Plan the remaining time for literary appreciation. Read an enjoyable poem or short story aloud so children
see that the goal is pleasurable experiences with books. As soon as oral and written phonogram reviews and spelling dictation
procedures have become automatic, devote more time to the writing and reading lessons.
The integration of spelling, writing, and reading lessons reinforces the components identified by the NRP as critical to early
reading success. For example, vocabulary instruction begins in the spelling lesson, is developed in the writing lesson, and applied
in the reading lesson.
Phonemic Awareness
Systematic Phonics
High Frequency Vocabulary
SPELLING
Literary Appreciation
Text Structure
Mental Actions
READING
High Frequency Vocabulary
Sentence Construction
Compositions
WRITING
THE SPALDING METHOD
Philosophy
Methodology
 3
Planning
The Spelling Lesson at a Glance
In the spelling lesson, children are explicitly taught phonemic
awareness, systematic phonics including handwriting and
pronuciation and spelling rules, and high-frequency spelling/
vocabulary words.
First, children are taught that spoken words are made up of
individual sounds (phonemes). Each day they say (segment)
the sounds in spoken words, then blend the sounds (phonemic
awareness). Beginning on Academic Day 2, they learn one
letter (phonogram) that represents an individual speech sound
or sounds (phonics). The teacher’s task is to make sure that
every child hears these individual sounds in words and learns
which letters represent which phonemes. As kindergartners are
developing fine motor control (typically two weeks), they write
the phonograms that represent the speech sounds. Phonemic
awareness and systematic phonics lessons are integrated all year.
Spelling is taught from the spoken word to the written form.
The relationship of each sound to the written symbol is thus
made clear. When children can say and write the first forty-five
phonograms (typically three months), they segment spoken
words, write these words in spelling/vocabulary notebooks, then
read them for spelling and reading. The Spalding marking system
enables them to decode regular and irregular words. These
account for 85% of the words children need in daily speaking,
writing, and reading. Construction of the notebooks provides
multisensory activities that integrate vocabulary instruction with
rules of the language.
Analyzing the written form of high-frequency words enables children to spell, write, and later read the words they encounter
in books. Phonemic awareness, systematic phonics including pronunciation and spelling rules, and high-frequency spelling/
vocabulary words are then reinforced in the writing lesson.
 4
Planning
Phonemic Awareness: Phoneme Manipulation Tasks
Understanding that spoken words and syllables consist of sequences
of speech sounds (phonemes) and that alphabet letters and letter
combinations represent basic speech sounds is essential. Kindergartners
are explicitly taught phoneme manipulation tasks, such as …
isolating individual phonemes in spoken words.
segmenting individual sounds in spoken words.
blending phonemes to form words.
identifying beginning, ending, and medial sounds in spoken
words.
Children are also explicitly taught the letters and letter combinations that represent phonemes.
Systematic Phonics: Phonograms with Handwriting
Spalding defines a phonogram as a single letter, or a fixed combination of
two, three, or four letters, that is the symbol for one sound (phoneme) in
a given word. As children are developing fine-motor control by practicing
activities such as stringing beads, cutting, gluing, and coloring (typically
two weeks), they write twenty-six phonograms on 5/8” lined paper. If one
new phonogram is introduced each day for four days a week, they will
learn forty-five phonograms in about three months.
Combining phonogram practice with handwriting facilitates retention
because four pathways to the brain (auditory, visual, kinesthetic,
and tactile) are used. Spalding explicitly teaches seventy common
phonograms that represent the forty-five basic speech sounds. The title,
The Writing Road to Reading (WRTR), means exactly what it says: First,
children write the phonograms, then words, to connect spoken sounds to
print.
The Spelling Lesson at a Glance, cont.
 5
Planning
Systematic Phonics: Rules of English Language Structure
Twenty-nine rules that govern phonogram pronunciation
and placement, spelling, and language structure are
explicitly taught. Rules are not memorized in rote
fashion; rather, each new rule is taught prior to dictating
the list that includes the word to which the rule applies. It
should be made clear to children that although no rule is
absolute, rules hold true often enough to be very helpful.
Rule numbers are entered in the spelling/vocabulary
notebook beside the word governed by the rule.
 6
Planning
Vocabulary: High-Frequency Words
High-frequency, core vocabulary words are the foundation for vocabulary
instruction. Words included in the Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary (S/V) Word
List are either in the core vocabulary listed in the Collins COBUILD English
Dictionary (1995) or provide practice of phonograms or spelling rules. By
using the Spalding Marking System daily, children learn to segment and
blend regular and irregular high-frequency words. These words are used to
teach spelling (as the basis for automatic word recognition when reading),
word usage and meaning, word parts (if any), and lastly, oral, and later,
written sentence construction. Using high-frequency words to teach spelling,
vocabulary, grammar, and rule application develops accurate spellers and
writers who become independent readers more quickly. Vocabulary is expanded
through classroom reading of Spalding’s Series 1 Leveled Readers, teacher
reading of fine literature aloud, and independent reading.
After developing fine-motor control and writing the first forty-five phonograms
(about three months), kindergartners write, from dictation, most frequently
used words in spelling/vocabulary notebooks. Construction of this notebook teaches children to analyze the written spelling
of words so they can spell, write, and read words encountered in books. The more words children analyze and read from their
notebooks, the more familiar they become with the vocabulary needed to become independent readers.
Dr. Farnham-Diggory, former Director of the Reading Study Center, University of Delaware, explained the
value of this notebook as follows:
“The personal spelling book has a remarkable psychological impact on children (not to mention parents),
as most of their schoolwork usually disappears into teachers’ files somewhere. The typical schoolchild never
sees a cumulative record of daily accomplishments. A spelling book with hundreds of correctly spelled words
in it…is a mighty impressive achievement. In addition, of course, the spelling book serves as a practice,
motivational, and reference device all at the same time.” (WRTR Foreword xvi).
The Spelling Lesson at a Glance, cont.
 7
Planning
The Writing Lesson at a Glance
To become proficient writers, children must learn a great
deal. Clear thinking, precise words, and correct ordering
of thoughts are needed to convey meaning. Kindergarten
children begin this process in writing lessons that are
divided into three strands: high-frequency vocabulary,
sentence construction, and composition.
In sentence construction lessons, they learn the usage and
meaning of unfamiliar or difficult high-frequency words
introduced in the spelling lesson. They also learn the
meanings of common suffixes and the rules for adding
them to base words.
During the first weeks of school, children are explicitly
taught to give oral sentences using the high-frequency
words they will later write in their spelling/vocabulary
notebooks. After attributes of written sentences have been
taught (typically five months), children begin writing four
types of simple sentences, then later, some children orally
compose compound and easy complex sentences.
Composition begins toward the end of the year as children learn to individually write related sentences. Then, in whole group,
they compose three to five sentence informative-narrative, informative, and narrative paragraphs. Some children individually
compose the three types of paragraphs.
 8
Planning
Sentence Construction with High-Frequency Vocabulary
In The Writing Road to Reading program, vocabulary development is
integrated with sentence construction. Vocabulary development includes
information about all aspects of words and word parts: pronunciation,
spelling, structure, usage, and meaning. Since vocabulary cannot be
learned in isolation, kindergartners are taught the pronunciation and
spelling of high-frequency words in spelling lessons.
In sentence construction lessons, children…
Learn the usage and meanings of compound words, homographs,
homophones, and other unfamiliar words through teacher-student
dialogues.
Explain language rules, syllable types, and parts of speech.
Compose the four types of simple sentences.
Explain how to add suffixes to base words and how the meaning is changed.
Explain the usage and meaning of unfamiliar words in literature, science, and social studies texts.
Kindergartners begin oral sentence construction lessons on Academic Day 1. These daily-integrated spelling, writing, and reading
lessons reinforce word recognition, usage, and meaning, as well as rule application, and sentence structure. Children master new
vocabulary more quickly because they discuss the use of words and meanings when constructing oral and then written sentences.
Children who know the attributes of a well-constructed sentence are more likely to become discerning readers as well as writers.
Composition with Text Comprehension
Composition is the other side of the comprehension “coin.” For kindergartners,
composition instruction begins after they have learned the attributes of written
sentences. Teachers model composing two or three sentences about a single
topic and explain the concept of related thoughts. While children are still
practicing related sentences, teachers explain and demonstrate how to compose
different types of writing. Kindergartners orally compose informative-narrative,
informative, and narrative compositions that teachers write on the board,
easel, or SMARTboard. Some children write simple paragraphs by the end of the
year. Children who learn how to compose different text types will more quickly
comprehend an author’s message.
The Writing Lesson at a Glance, cont.
 9
Planning
The Reading Lesson at a Glance
In the reading lesson, children are explicitly taught fluent and expressive reading, literary appreciation, text structure, and
comprehension strategies called mental actions. The reading lesson focuses on the thoughts expressed by authors because the
subskills of reading have been taught in spelling and writing lessons.
In literary appreciation lessons, children learn the attributes of fine writing by listening to and discussing high quality books their
teacher reads aloud. When thirty phonograms have been learned, they begin reading Spalding’s Series 1 Leveled Readers aloud
daily to develop fluent reading.
In text structure lessons, they learn the elements of narrative, informative, and informative-narrative writing. Text structure and
literary appreciation lessons are integrated all year. That knowledge is applied and expanded when children listen to, and later
read, leveled readers and then fine literature.
When children can consistently name and identify the elements of three basic types of writing (typically toward the end of
the year), they are taught to identify, label, and consciously use three mental actions (comprehension strategies): monitoring
comprehension, making connections, and predicting.
 10
Planning
Fluency: Literary Appreciation
In The Writing Road to Reading program, literary appreciation begins on day one. To
foster a desire to read, Spalding recommends books that stir the imagination and paint
pictures for the mind’s eye to see. The teacher reads expressively so children learn that
fluent and expressive reading enhances their pleasure and understanding. Time is taken to
appreciate the well-turned phrase, to admire or censure a happening, and to reread a part
that is especially worthy. Children’s understanding of narrative elements (introduced in text
structure lessons) is developed in literary appreciation lessons.
Fluency: Automatic and Expressive Reading
Automatic word recognition, vocabulary enrichment, and print
conventions are practiced in spelling and writing lessons so
that children can practice fluent reading with enjoyable books.
After children have learned the first thirty phonograms, they
read the first Series 1 Leveled Reader, Sam and Puff (typically
Week 10) in unison and individually. Reading aloud enhances
fluency and helps children learn to speak clearly. Children
continue to read Series 1 Readers daily to develop fluent and
expressive reading (See Introduction page xx). Because of this
on-going reinforcement, Spalding-taught children quickly
become independent readers. Many teachers and parents are
surprised to see children just begin reading after several weeks
of this integrated instruction.
The Reading Lesson at a Glance, cont.
 11
Planning
Text Comprehension: Text Structure
Children learn that authors organize their writing differently depending on their purpose. Knowledge of text organization helps
children focus attention on the important elements in each type of text. Using Text Structure posters and organizers, teachers
model the identification of the distinguishing characteristics of narrative, informative, and a combination of the two that Spalding
calls informative-narrative.
McCall-Harby, McCall-Crabbs Standard Test
Lessons in Reading Book A, and literature
books are used to teach elements of narrative,
informative, and informative-narrative
text structures. Teachers check children’s
understanding by having them show one of the
three Spalding Text Structure Cards.
 12
Planning
Text Comprehension: Mental Actions
Explicit comprehension instruction begins as
children listen to the teacher read literature
selections. Children learn to think about
their thinking (metacognition). They learn
to use the mental actions (comprehension
strategies) while listening so they can apply
them automatically when reading.
Teachers model monitoring comprehension,
making connections, and predicting while
kindergartners listen to literature selections.
Then teachers coach as children identify
and label the mental actions. Teachers check
children’s understanding by having them
show the first three Mental Action Cards
while listening to the teacher model her
thinking.
For easy reference, the basic spelling, writing, and reading procedures used in The Spalding Method are detailed in the next
section of this Guide, Delivering Integrated Language Arts Instruction.
You are now on your way to becoming a great Spalding teacher!
The Reading Lesson at a Glance, cont.
 13
Planning
Framework for Designing Lessons
The following table provides an overview of the four steps involved in designing integrated Language Arts lessons using The
Spalding Method:
Step 1
Selecting instructional
objectives at the
correct level of
difficulty
Preparing the
introduction and
conclusion
Assigning an
instructional delivery
level for each
objective
Aligning information,
questions, responses,
and activities to each
lesson objective
Create lesson introduction
Create lesson closure
Step 2
Step 3
Analyze the curriculum
Analyze student achievement
Plan a strong model for
initial instruction
Plan prompts and check for
understanding questions
for coaching children
Plan to scaffold and fade
Align information to
each objective
Align questions and
responses to each objective
Align practice activities
to each objective
Step 4
 14
Planning
Step #1: Selecting Instructional Objectives at the Correct Level of Difficulty
1. Analyze the Curriculum
Review the kindergarten spelling, writing, and reading grade-level objectives in the Scope and Sequence pages 19-31. Also,
study the basic instructional procedures listed in the next section, Delivering Instruction, until you have committed them to
memory. Each day’s lessons include spelling, writing, and reading objectives because the content and skills are interrelated
and interdependent. In kindergarten, most of the instructional time is devoted to the spelling lesson because this is where
children learn to read.
2. Analyze Student Achievement
Planning objectives at the correct level of difficulty also requires recognizing able learners who need challenge, children
who are experiencing difficulties, and children with language disabilities. For example, some kindergartners come to
school knowing how to read. After initial whole-group introduction of phonograms and daily oral and written phonogram
reviews, plan to have simple books for these children to read while you preteach and/or reteach children who have difficulty.
Some children may require considerably more help and practice. See Evaluating Skill Mastery for help in differentiating
instruction to meet all children’s needs.
Kindergarten children should be ready to transition from prereading (Stage 0) to decoding (Stage 1). However, if they are
not ready, the Spalding spelling, writing, and reading curricula provide explicit procedures for reinforcing skills that should
have been mastered in the prereading stage and for introducing all Stage 1 skills.
Framework for Designing Lessons, cont.
 15
Planning
Step #2: Assigning Instructional Delivery Level(s) for Each Objective
After analyzing children’s performance, plan to model, coach, or scaffold and fade depending on the objective (See Delivering
2-3). Each level requires careful planning. Be prepared to change the level of instruction as needed during a single lesson.
1. Plan Strong Models for Initial Instruction
If your objective involves initial learning in spelling, writing, or reading, always model in whole group first. This means you
plan all the information you will need and the demonstration of the procedure(s). It may be a concrete task such as precisely
saying the sounds in spoken words, or it may be thinking out loud as you figure out the type of writing. The more precise
your initial explanations and demonstrations are, the less reteaching you have to do. Practicing your explanation and
demonstration and preparing questions that check children’s knowledge and understanding of the new skill or concept all
help you be prepared. Sample knowledge and understanding questions follow:
“What are phonograms?” (knowledge) “Where may I use this phonogram (ay)?” (understanding)
2. Plan Prompts and Check for Understanding Questions for Coaching Children
On the other hand, if the objective is a review of previous learning, plan to coach. Coaching begins immediately after you
have provided one or more models and have explained each new task. While coaching, observe children’s performance on
each task and listen carefully to their responses to your questions so you can identify those who are ready to move on, those
who need another model, and those who need more practice in small groups. Plan prompts to guide children’s performance
and questions to check their ability to apply the new learning in a new situation. A sample application question follows:
“May I use this phonogram in the word day?” (application)
As soon as children can apply knowledge of the new task, ask higher-level thinking questions. Eliciting children’s articulation
and reflection also takes planning. Prepare questions that require children to articulate and reflect on their performance
in spelling, writing, and reading lessons. When children do the thinking and articulating, they develop proficiency more
quickly. Sample higher-level thinking questions follow:
“How are the letters a and d different?” (analysis) “Which is your best phonogram and tell me why? (evaluation)
“Why do you think all children like this story? (inference)
3. Plan to Scaffold and Fade
A scaffold is a support system to be used as needed. When the majority of children know the content and can apply
their knowledge accurately and independently, fade (withdraw support). The amount of practice required to reach this
point varies significantly. Therefore, use each child’s daily performance to determine when to remove support (see the
Evaluating section).
A more complete explanation of how to consistently deliver effective lessons is outlined in the next section, Delivering Instruction.
 16
Planning
Step #3: Aligning Information, Questions, Responses, and Activities (IQRA) to
Each Lesson Objective
After selecting an instructional objective and determining whether modeling, coaching, or scaffolding is required, prepare
information (I), questions (Q), responses (R) to children, and practice activities (A) aligned to your objective. That means that
the content you present, the actions you select to facilitate children’s understanding, and the activities you plan are focused on the
lesson objective.
1. For your Model, Align Information to Each Objective
Information is the foundation for thinking and learning. It is impossible to comprehend, write, solve problems, or be creative
without information. Use the following procedures to design lesson content aligned to the lesson objective.
Identify the information that is essential for achieving the objective (need to know).
Organize the information so children will see the relationship of each part to other parts and to the whole.
Plan simple and direct vocabulary that precisely describes what is to be taught (e.g., distinguishing
handwriting features, rules, or concepts).
Prepare accurate and clear examples of the content to be taught. For example, illustrate the distinguishing
feature(s) of letter formation. Don’t wait until you are in the midst of a lesson to think of an example.
2. For Coaching, Align Questions and Responses to Each Objective
Questions that check children’s understanding and your responses to their answers must also be aligned to each objective.
Use the following procedures.
Plan questions that require children to articulate skills/procedures/concepts and reflect on their
performance…
Identify the critical attributes that discriminate between features, skills, or concepts taught (e.g., b vs. d).
Explain application of a rule.
Explain a concept (e.g., words consist of individual sounds).
Plan responses to children’s answers that…
Reinforce the correct information.
Dignify their responses, and then correct a wrong or incomplete answer.
Redirect attention to the objective.
Framework for Designing Lessons, cont.
 17
Planning
3. Align Practice Activities to Each Lesson Objective
Well-planned lesson activities are aligned to the objective and provide opportunities for children to analyze the task, to
practice it until mastery is achieved, and to manage their attention. Use the following procedures:
Task Analysis: Plan practice activities that require children to…
Articulate distinguishing features and attributes.
Analyze and explain steps of a procedure or process.
Analyze and explain application of a rule or a concept.
Practice
For new learning, plan short and frequent (massed) practice.
After children accurately perform a skill and explain an application or concept,
plan to distribute practice over time to develop and maintain automaticity.
Attention Control
Plan to have all children actively participate to maintain attention on tasks. Since attention can be
focused on only one task at a time, having all children participate develops their attention control.
Plan to monitor children's participation daily (e.g., move about the room to ensure that children
are on task, assisting as needed).
Plan think time for check for understanding and reflection questions, and some type of visible
responses that ensure active participation (e.g., have children show Text Structure or Mental Action
Cards).
Plan signals for children to switch attention to higher or lower skills as needed to accomplish the
task. For example, when a child mispronounces a word while reading, say the last word the child
pronounced correctly to prompt the child to sound out the next word, then reread the sentence.
 18
Planning
Step #4: Preparing the Introduction and Conclusion
After preparing aligned information, questions, responses, and activities, design an introduction and conclusion that are also
aligned to the objective.
1. Introducing the Lesson
Children usually expend more effort, and consequently increase their learning, if they know what they will be learning
and why it is important (purpose for learning). Making connections with prior (background) knowledge is also essential.
Active participation by all children is required to increase learning and to help them develop attention control, an essential
principle of skill learning.
Follow these procedures:
Plan an introduction that focuses attention on the new lesson content and connects to each child’s prior
learning.
Plan active participation by all children.
2. Closing the Lesson
Follow these procedures:
Plan active participation by all children: prepare questions that require children to mentally summarize
what they learned about critical aspects of the lesson objective; provide wait time for each child to think, and
then ask individual children to share. Hold all children accountable by calling on different children (non-
volunteers) in successive lessons.
Plan smooth transitions from one objective within a lesson to another and between spelling, writing, and
reading lessons.
Dignify their responses, and then correct a wrong or incomplete answer.
Redirect attention to the objective.
Framework for Designing Lessons, cont.
 19
Planning
Scope and Sequence Part 1: Program Objectives
The Spalding Scope and Sequence is divided into grade-level spelling, writing, and reading instructional objectives that are
introduced, practiced, and in some cases, mastered. Spalding defines an instructional objective as a clear statement of what
students should know and/or be able to do at the completion of a learning task.
The types of instructional objectives referenced in The Writing Road to Reading program include:
Grade-level objectives that state what each child should know (general content) and be able to do (observable,
measurable behavior) by the end of the year; and
Lesson objectives (derived from each grade-level objective) that state what each child should know (specific content)
and be able to do at the end of a lesson or a lesson segment.
Thus, every instructional objective has two parts: the content to be learned and the observable and measurable behavior that
demonstrates performance.
Kindergarten through third-grade objectives are included so teachers can see the progression of skills and concepts to support
differentiated instruction. For example, most Spalding kindergartners learn more than forty-five phonograms, and many master
seventy.
The following codes are used throughout the scope and sequence to indicate the instructional level to which grade-level skills
should be taught and assessed:
Scope & Sequence Coding Schema
I/P: Introduce and Practice, but mastery (automaticity) by a majority of children is not expected.
P: Practice to achieve mastery (automaticity).
M: Mastery means accurate and automatic recall of grade-appropriate content and application of grade-appropriate skills
by 80% of children 80% of the time.
R: Review to reinforce 1) previously introduced content and 2) application of skills to new, grade-appropriate content.
C: Challenge for children who have achieved mastery of grade-level content and skills.
Comparison of Grade-Level and Lesson Objectives
Grade Level Objective
The student will…
segment spoken words into sounds and
syllables.
blend spoken sounds into words.
Academic Day 1 Lesson Objective
The student will…
segment me, do, and, go, at into individual
speech sounds.
blend sounds in spoken words me, do, and, go,
at.
 20
Planning
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Spelling Grade-Level Objectives
Phonemic Awareness The student will … K 1 2 3
Systematic Phonics: Sound-Symbols The student will … K 1 2 3
1. segment spoken words into sounds/syllables. M R R R
2. count sounds in spoken words. M R R R
3. blend spoken sounds into words. M R R R
1. explain the purpose for learning phonograms. M M R R
2. explain the purpose for precise handwriting. I/P M R R
3. precisely read 70 common phonograms. I/P M R R
4. precisely say and write 70 common phonograms. I/P M R R
5. precisely read 17 additional phonograms. - C I/P I/P
Systematic Phonics: Language Rules The student will … K 1 2 3
1. write qu (a two-letter consonant sound) to say /kw/. I/P M R R
2. read c before e, i, and y as /s/. I/P M R R
3. read g before e, i, y as /j /. I/P M R R
4. read/mark /ā /, /ē /, /ō /, and /ū /, at the end of an open syllable. I/P M R R
5. read/mark i and y at end of an open syllable. I/P M R R
6. write y, not i, at the end of a word. I/P M R R
7. read/mark/explain jobs of silent e’s. I/P M R R
8. read /or/ as /er/ after a w. I/P M R R
9. explain/apply the 1-1-1 rule to one-syllable words (hop). C I/P P M
10. explain/apply the 2-1-1 rule to multisyllable words (begin). C I/P P P
11. explain/apply r. 11 to final silent e words (hope/hoping). C I/P P M
12. write ie except after c, if we say /ā / or in exceptions. - I/P P M
13. write sh to say /sh/ at the beginning/end of words and at the I/P M R R
end of syllables.
14. write ti, si, ci to say /sh/ in syllables after the first one. - I/P P M
15. write si to say /sh/ if preceding syllable/base word ends in s. - I/P P M
16. read/mark and explain that si may also say /zh/. - I/P P M
17. write two l’s, f’s, or s’s after one vowel in one syllable. I/P M R R
18. write ay to say /ā / at the end of a word. I/P M R R
19. read / ī / and /ō / before two consonants when appropriate. I/P M R R
20. explain/apply r. 20 (s never follows the letter x). C I/P P M
21. write all with one l when used as a prefix. C I/P P M
22. write till and full with one l when used as a suffix. C I/P P M
23. write dge to say /j/ after one vowel saying its first sound. C I/P P M
24. write i, instead of y, when adding vowel suffixes (endings). C I/P P M
25. write ck to say /k/ after one vowel saying its first sound. I/P P M R
 21
Planning
26. capitalize names and titles. I/P M R R
27. write z to say /z/ at beginning of words (zoo). I/P M R R
28. read suffix ed as /ed/ if the base word ends in d or t (graded); C I/P M R
read suffix ed as /d/ after a voiced consonant (lived);
read suffix ed as /t/ after an unvoiced consonant (stopped).
29. read double consonants in both syllables for spelling (lit tle); I/P P M R
read double consonant words in normal speech for reading.
Systematic Phonics: Language Rules The student will … K 1 2 3
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Systematic Phonics: High Frequency Words The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the purpose for spelling dictation. I/P M R R
2. precisely say, write, read words in sections A – G. I/P M R R
3. precisely say, write, read words in section H. I/P M R R
4. precisely say, write, read words in section I. I/P M R R
5. precisely say, write, read words in section J. - M R R
6. precisely say, write, read words in section K. - I/P M R
7. precisely say, write, read words in section L. - I/P M R
8. precisely say, write, read words in section M. - I/P M R
9. precisely say, write, read words in section N. - I/P M R
10. precisely say, write, read words in section O. - C I/P M
11. precisely say, write, read words in section P. - - I/P M
12. precisely say, write, read words in section Q. - - I/P M
13. precisely say, write, read words in section R. - - C I/P
14. precisely say, write, read words in section S. - - - I/P
15. precisely say, write, read words in section T. - - - I/P
16. precisely say, write, read words in section U.				C
Spelling Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
Systematic Phonics: Vocabulary The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meanings of...
syllable. I/P M R R
vowel. I/P M R R
consonant. I/P M R R
open syllable. I/P M R R
closed syllable. I/P M R R
consonant + le syllable. I/P M R R
silent final e I/P M R R
2. identify syllable types in spelling words. I/P M R R
 22
Planning
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
1. first words of sentences. I/P M R R
2. single-word proper nouns and titles (Mr, etc.). I/P M R R
3. abbreviations. - I/P M R
4. multiword proper nouns. C I/P P M
5. titles of books, poems, short stories. C I/P P M
6. informal letter components. - I/P P M
7. first words of direct quotations. - C I/P M
8. familial titles, races, nationalities. - - C I/P
Conventions: Capitalization The student will capitalize… K 1 2 3
Writing Grade-Level Objectives
1. periods (full stops) …				
at the end of declarative sentences. I/P M R R
with abbreviations. C I/P M R
2. question marks. I/P P M R
3. exclamation points. I/P P M R
4. apostrophes in contractions and possessives. - I/P P M
5. commas …				
in series, dates, addresses, friendly letters. - I/P P M
in compound sentences. I/P P M M
in complex sentences. C I/P P M
with introductory phrases and clauses. - I/P P P
with appositives, direct address, interrupters, quotations. - I/P P P
after closing a business letter. - - C I/P
to avoid confusion. - - - C
6. underlining for titles of books within texts. - I/P P M
7. quotation marks …				
with direct quotations. - C I/P P
with titles of short works within text. - C I/P P
8. colons …				
in time. I/P P M R
in lists. - - C I/P
after salutation in business letters.			 C I/P
9. hyphens …				
in syllabication. - C I/P P
in words that designate compound numbers, fractions. - C I/P P
in compound adjectives. - - C I/P
Conventions: Punctuation The student will use … K 1 2 3
 23
Planning
1. explain the attributes of a declarative sentence. I/P M R R
2. compose simple declarative sentences that include …
subject nouns with present tense regular action verbs. I/P P M R
subject pronouns, present tense regular action verbs. I/P P M R
subject noun plurals and action verbs. I/P P M R
adjectives, nouns, and present tense regular action verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns linking verbs with adjectives. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns, linking verbs with nouns. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns with past tense regular verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns with past tense irregular verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns with main and helping verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns, action verbs, and object nouns. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns, action verbs, and object pronouns. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns, action verbs, and adverbs. I/P P M R
irregular noun plurals, action, linking or helping verbs. I/P P M R
compound subjects, action/linking/helping verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns/pronouns with compound action verbs. I/P P M R
subject nouns with action verbs and compound object nouns/pronouns. C I/P M R
subject nouns with action verbs with prepositional phrases. I/P P M R
3. compose declarative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of I/P M R R
synonyms, homophones, homographs, and other unfamiliar
spelling/vocabulary words.
4. explain the attributes of an interrogative sentence (question). I/P P M R
5. compose interrogative sentences that include …
subject nouns/pronouns with action/linking/helping verbs. I/P P M R
6. explain the attributes of an exclamatory sentence. I/P P M R
7. compose exclamatory sentences that include …
subject nouns/pronouns with action verbs. I/P P M R
8. explain the attributes of an imperative sentence (command). I/P P M R
9. compose imperative sentences that include …
subject nouns/pronouns with action/linking/helping verbs. I/P P M R
10. compose four types of simple sentences that demonstrate
usage and meaning of unfamiliar spelling words. I/P P M R
11. explain the attributes of a compound sentence. C I/P M R
12. compose compound sentences that include …
subject nouns/pronouns and conjunctions and, or, but. C I/P M R
subject nouns/pronouns and conjunctions for, nor, yet. - C I/P M
13. explain the attributes of a complex sentence. C I/P P M
14. compose complex sentences that include …
subject nouns/pronouns, conjunctions if, after, when. C I/P P P
subject nouns, conjunctions than, unless, because, however. C I/P P P
15. compose simple/compound/complex sentences that demonstrate I/P P P P
usage and meaning of unfamiliar spelling words.
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
Sentence Construction & Vocabulary The student will … K 1 2 3
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
 24
Planning
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
Morphology & Vocabulary The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of syllable. I/P P M R
explain the meaning of vowel. I/P P M R
explain the meaning of consonant. I/P P M R
2. identify vowels/consonants in spelling word syllables. I/P P M R
		 explain the meaning of open syllable. I/P P P M
		 explain the meaning of closed syllable. I/P P P M
		 explain the meaning of consonant + le syllable. I/P P P M
		 identify type of syllables in spelling words. I/P P P M
3. explain the meaning of base word. I/P I/P P P
4. identify base words in spelling words. I/P I/P P P
5. explain the meaning of prefix. - I/P P P
6. identify prefixes in spelling words that express … - - I/P P
number: e.g., mono, uni, di, bi, tri, tetra, quad, hemi. - - I/P P
time: e.g., pre, post - - I/P P
place: e.g., in, ex. - - I/P P
negation or reversal, e.g., un, a, re, de, an, in. - - I/P P
7. explain the meaning of suffix (ending). C I/P P P
8. identify suffixes that indicate …
number: e.g., s, es, ren, I/P P M R
time: e.g., er, est, ed. I/P P M R
part of speech: e.g., y, er, en, ful, ion, tion, ance, ence. - C I/P M
tense: e.g., ed, ing. I/P P M R
9. explain the meaning of word root. - C I/P P
10. identify word roots in spelling/vocabulary words. - C I/P P
11. identify prefixes, suffixes, base or word roots in spelling words. - I/P P P
1. explain the meaning of noun. I/P M R R
2. identify nouns as persons, places, or things, or concepts. I/P M R R
3. explain the meaning of plural. I/P M R R
4. use the suffix s or es to form noun plurals. I/P M R R
5. explain the meaning of irregular plural. I/P M R R
6. write irregular noun plurals. I/P M R R
7. identify suffixes that form nouns: - I/P P P
er, ren, ian, s, es, or.
ar, ance, ment ition, ive, ent, ation, ice, sion, age, ence, ison.
edge, ist, ary, ness, ity, ing, ry, ial, al, y, ian, ful, ery.
ate, ship, en, able, ual, tion, ible, dom, ency, atory, ard.
ure, ety, ee, aire, itive, cy, ology.
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Nouns The student will … K 1 2 3
 25
Planning
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
8. form nouns by adding suffixes. - I/P P P
9. explain the meaning of subject noun. I/P P M R
10. identify subject nouns in simple sentences. I/P P M R
After all parts of speech have been taught …				
11. explain the meaning of object noun. I/P P M R
12. identify object nouns in simple sentences. I/P P M R
13. explain the meaning of common and proper nouns. I/P P M R
14. identify common and proper nouns in sentences. I/P P M R
15. explain the meaning of compound noun. C I/P M R
16. identify compound nouns in simple sentences. C I/P M R
17. explain/ identify verbs used as nouns (verbals). - - - C
18. use nouns in sentences (see Sentence Construction). I/P M R R
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
1. explain the meaning of action verb. I/P M R R
2. identify action verbs in sentences. I/P M R R
3. add suffixes s or es to third-person singular action verbs. I/P P M R
4. explain the meaning of linking verb. I/P P M R
5. identify linking verbs in sentences. I/P P M R
6. explain the meaning of tense (time) …
present tense. I/P P M R
		 past tense of regular verbs. I/P P M R
7. add the past tense suffix ed to regular action verbs. I/P P M R
8. explain the meaning of irregular verbs. I/P P M R
9. write the past tense of irregular verbs. C I/P M R
10. explain the meaning of future tense. C I/P M R
11. write verb phrases that express future action. C I/P M R
12. explain the meaning of action happening now. I/P P M R
13. write verb phrases to express action happening now. C I/P M R
14. explain the meaning of principal parts of verbs. - I/P P M
15. identify principal parts of verbs in sentences. - I/P P M
16. write verb phrases that use principal parts of verbs. - - I/P P
17. explain the meaning of main and helping verbs. I/P P M R
18. write main and helping verb phrases. I/P P M R
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Nouns The student will … K 1 2 3
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Verbs The student will … K 1 2 3
 26
Planning
19. explain the meaning of compound verbs. I/P P M R
20. identify compound verbs in sentences. I/P P M R
21. identify suffixes that form verbs:
ing, en, ed, ate, er, fy, ish, ize, s, es, ade, age. C I/P P P
22. form verbs by adding suffixes. - I/P P P
23. explain the meaning of transitive and intransitive verbs. - C I/P P
24. categorize transitive and intransitive verbs. - C I/P P
25. use verbs in sentences (see Sentence Construction). I/P M R R
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
1. explain the meaning of pronoun. I/P P M R
2. explain the meaning of subject pronoun. I/P P M R
3. substitute subject pronouns for subject nouns:
she, he, we, you, it, I, they. I/P P M R
After all parts of speech are introduced …				
4. explain the meaning of object pronoun. I/P P M R
5. substitute object pronouns for object nouns:
me, him, us, you, it, her, them. I/P P M R
6. explain subject/pronoun agreement. C I/P M R
7. identify subject/pronoun agreement in sentences. C I/P M R
8. explain the meaning of possession (belonging to). - I/P M R
9. identify possessive pronouns in sentences:
my, mine, your, yours, her, hers, his, its, our, ours, their, theirs. - I/P M R
10. explain the meaning of interrogative pronoun. - I/P M R
11. identify interrogative pronouns in sentences: - I/P M R
what, who, which, whose, whom. - I/P M R
12. explain the meaning of demonstrative pronoun. - I/P M R
13. identify demonstrative pronouns in sentences: - I/P M R
this, that, these, those. - I/P M R
14. explain the meaning of reflexive pronoun. - I/P M R
15. identify reflexive pronouns in sentences:
herself, myself, himself, itself, themselves. - I/P M R
16. explain the meaning of indefinite pronoun. - I/P P M
17. identify indefinite pronouns in sentences:				
all, much, one, some, other, each, more, most. - I/P P M
any, many, anything, another, nothing, both. - I/P P M
few, something, everything, none, nobody, several. - I/P P P
either, neither, everybody, anyone, everyone. - I/P P P
18. use pronouns in sentences (see Sentence Construction). - I/P M R
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Verbs The student will … K 1 2 3
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Pronouns The student will … K 1 2 3
 27
Planning
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
1. explain the meaning of adjective. I/P P M R
2. explain the meaning of noun signal (article). I/P P M R
3. use a, the, and an with appropriate nouns. I/P P M R
4. explain the purpose for using adjectives. I/P P M R
5. identify adjectives in sentences. I/P P M R
6. write appropriate adjectives with nouns. C I/P M R
7. write phrases with multiple adjectives and commas. C I/P P M
8. explain the meaning of comparative adjectives. C I/P M R
		 add the suffix er to adjectives. C I/P P M
		 add the suffix est to adjectives. C I/P P M
		 use more/most with two- to three-syllable adjectives. - C I/P M
9. explain the meaning of proper adjective. - - C I/P
10. write phrases including proper adjectives. - - C I/P
11. identify suffixes that form adjectives:
ed, al, en, ish, ant, ent, ous, able, ible, ful, less, ern, ive. - I/P P P
12. form adjectives by adding suffixes. - I/P P P
13. use adjectives and phrases in sentences (see Sentence Construction). C I/P M R
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Adjectives The student will … K 1 2 3
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Adverbs The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of adverb. I/P P M R
2. explain the purpose for using adverbs. I/P P M R
3. identify adverbs in sentences. I/P P M R
4. write adverbs that express extent/when/where/ how:				
so, no, now, up, not, ago, out, today, yes, just, too. I/P P M R
then, as, how, well, fast, north, back, away, soon, yet. C I/P M R
after, very, west, south, inside, outside, east, near. C I/P M R
down, why, still, never, here, most, more, when. C I/P M R
twice, where, first, even, behind, around, without. C I/P M R
maybe, tonight, indeed, ever, once, there, early. C I/P M R
close, alone, third, within, nothing, no, past, almost. C I/P M R
all, less, off, again, also, please, anyway, daily. C I/P M R
5. explain the meaning of adverb phrases. C I/P P M
6. write adverb phrases that express extent/when/where/how. C I/P P M
7. identify suffixes that form adverbs (ily, ly). - I/P P P
8. form adverbs by adding suffixes. - I/P P P
9. use adverbs/adverb phrases in sentences (see Sentence Construction). I/P P M R
 28
Planning
1. explain the meaning of conjunction. I/P P M R
2. use and/or to join compound nouns. I/P P M R
3. use and/or to join compound verbs. I/P P M R
4. use and/or to join adjective phrases. C I/P M R
5. use and/or to join adverb phrases. C I/P P M
6. use and/or to join sentences. I/P P M R
7. use but to contrast nouns. C I/P M R
8. use but to contrast verbs. C I/P M R
9. use but to contrast sentences. C I/P M R
10. use conjunctions with complex sentences:
if, as, after, than, when. C I/P M R
unless, because, however, while. C I/P P M
whether, though, since, although. - - C I/P
either…or, neither…nor. - - C I/P
11. use conjunctions in sentences (see Sentence Construction). C I/P M R
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Conjunctions The student will … K 1 2 3
Parts of Speech & Vocabulary: Prepositions The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of preposition. I/P P M R
2. use prepositions with nouns/pronouns (phrases):
at, on, in, up, of, out, into, by, over, to, about, for. I/P P M R
after, inside, outside, near, down, under, from, along. C I/P M R
with, through. upon, between, without, behind, around, across. C I/P M R
by, above, before, within, beside, past. C I/P P M
except, among, aboard, during, until, since, toward. - C I/P P
against, beneath, beyond, throughout. C I/P P P
3. write adjective prepositional phrases. C I/P P M
4. write adverb prepositional phrases. C I/P P M
5. use prepositions in sentences (see Sentence Construction). C I/P P M
Related Sentences The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of topic. I/P P M R
2. explain the meaning of related sentences. I/P P M R
3. distinguish between related and unrelated sentences. I/P P M R
4. compose two or three related sentences that include …
previously introduced language skills. I/P P M R
 29
Planning
1. use the writing process to compose …
first-person informative-narratives. - C I/P P
third-person informative-narratives. - C I/P P
informatives. - C I/P P
first-person narratives. - C I/P P
third-person narratives. - C I/P P
informal communications. - C I/P P
formal communications. - - I/P P
2. summarize informative-narratives. - C I/P P
3. summarize informatives. - C I/P P
4. summarize narratives. - C I/P P
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Paragraph Construction The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain attributes of paragraphs. - I/P P M
2. explain paragraph conventions (margins/indents). - I/P P M
3. explain stages in the writing process:				
prewriting, composing, revising, editing, publishing - I/P P M
		 (by reading, speaking, media presentation).
4. use the writing process to compose …
first-person informative-narratives. - I/P P M
third-person informative-narratives. - I/P P M
informative paragraphs. - I/P P M
first-person narrative paragraphs. - I/P P M
third-person narrative paragraphs. - I/P P M
5. summarize informative-narratives. - C I/P P
6. summarize informatives. - C I/P P
7. summarize narratives. - C I/P P
Writing Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
Composition The student will … K 1 2 3
 30
Planning
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Literary Appreciation The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of attributes of imaginative literature. I/P P M R
2. identify attributes in imaginative literature:
precise language, emotional appeal. I/P P M R
content, insight, and universality. I/P I/P P P
3. reflect on author’s use of attributes:
precise language, emotional appeal. I/P P P M
content, insight, and universality. I/P P P P
4. compare use of attributes across selections/cultures:
precise language, emotional appeal. C I/P P M
content, insight, and universality. C I/P P P
5. identify elements in imaginative literature:
characters (main and supporting) by:
 their appearance, speech, actions/reactions,
 others’ comments, author’s comments. C I/P P P
settings (integral and backdrop). C I/P P P
plots (order, types of conflict, patterns of actions). C I/P P P
point of view (first and third). C I/P P P
theme (main idea). C I/P P P
style :
		  onomatopoeia, alliteration, simile. C C I/P P
		  idioms, rhythm, hyperbole, imagery. C C I/P P
6. reflect (evaluate) author’s use of elements:
characters, setting, plot. C I/P P P
point of view, theme (main idea). C I/P P P
7. compare elements across selections/cultures:
characters, setting, plot. C I/P P P
point of view, theme (main idea). C I/P P P
8. explain elements of fluent, expressive reading. C I/P P P
9. read fluently and expressively. C I/P P P
Reading Grade-Level Objectives
 31
Planning
1. explain the meaning of author’s purpose. I/P P M R
2. explain/identify author’s purpose in narratives. I/P P M R
3. explain the meaning of narrative elements. I/P P M R
4. identify narrative elements in paragraphs. I/P P M R
5. explain/identify author’s purpose in informatives. I/P P M R
6. explain the meaning of informative elements. I/P P M R
7. identify informative elements in paragraphs. I/P P M R
8. explain/identify author’s purpose in informative/narratives. I/P P M R
9. explain the meaning of informative-narrative elements. I/P P M R
10. identify both narrative and informative elements in paragraphs. I/P P M R
11. use elements to identify types of writing. I/P P M R
12. use elements to vary reading rate. I/P P M R
Reading Grade-Level Objectives, cont.
I/P: Introduce/Practice P: Practice M: Mastery R: Review/Reinforce C: Challenge
Text Structure The student will … K 1 2 3
Mental Actions The student will … K 1 2 3
1. explain the meaning of mental actions (metacognition). I/P P M R
2. explain the purpose for consciously using mental actions. I/P P M R
3. monitor comprehension of …
words. I/P P M R
phrases. I/P P M R
sentences. I/P P M R
4. make connections with prior knowledge and text to …
infer word meanings, topic, cause and effect. I/P P M R
elaborate on topic, main idea, outcomes. I/P P M R
5. make predictions of …
type of writing, topic, topic sentence, main idea. C I/P P M
		 actions, events, behavior, outcomes. C I/P P M
6. reformat/categorize information to …
identify essential and additional information. C I/P P M
identify elements of types of writing. C I/P P M
7. mentally summarize …
retell narratives in correct sequence. C I/P P M
restate information in correct sequence. C I/P P M
identify stated main ideas in text. C I/P P M
derive implied main ideas in text. - I/P P M
8. use mental actions to comprehend print. I/P P M R
 32
Planning
 33
Planning
Scope & Sequence Part 2: Lesson Objectives
The remainder of this section outlines lesson objectives in a four week overview, daily, and then weekly formats specific for this
grade level.
Lesson Plan Key
The key for these overviews is as follows:
Time Schedule
A minimum of 60 to 90 minutes is recommended for kindergarten language arts lessons. Times suggested in the spelling, writing,
and reading lessons are flexible (e.g., they allow the freedom to spend more time on a spelling lesson one day, and more time on
writing or reading the next). When faced with time restrictions, kindergarten teachers should focus on all spelling and sentence
construction objectives found in lesson objectives.
Considerations for Differentiated Instruction
Because The Spalding Method is a diagnostic (rather than scripted) program, teachers must plan for variations in skills mastery
at all points in the academic year. The following recommended weekly and daily lesson objectives are meant, therefore, more as a
general pacing guide for instruction rather than a rigid schedule of outcomes. Spalding teachers evaluate children’s performance
every day and then adjust instruction using a combination of whole group, small group, and individual instruction to ensure
that all children achieve. To facilitate planning for differentiated instruction, templates to create variations in daily and weekly
objectives based on individual children’s needs are found at the end of this section.
WRTR The Writing Road to Reading
M/CK/C Model, Check for Understanding, Coach
OPR Oral Phonogram Review
WPR Written Phonogram Review
P Planning Integrated Language Arts Instruction
D Delivering Integrated Language Arts Instruction
A Assessing Skills Mastery
E Evaluating Skills Mastery
* Use alternative decodables/literary selections
that are good examples for teaching reading ob-
jectives if books in the Guide are not available.
≈ Approximate Times
S/V Spelling/Vocabulary (Word List)
 Spelling, Writing, and Reading Tips
 34
Planning
SPELLING WRITING READING
Introduce literary
appreciation on Day 1
using children’s literature
(Delivering).
After 30 phonograms have
been introduced, begin daily
reading of Series 1 Leveled
Readers in unison and
individually.
Use McCall-Harby, McCall-
Crabbs Book A, literature
selections, and the procedure
in Delivering to teach
elements of narrative,
informative, and informative-
narrative writing.
Use McCall-Harby, McCall-
Crabbs Book A, literature
selections, and the procedure
in Delivering to teach the
mental actions.
Reinforce the elements in
literary selections.
While children are learning the first
45 phonograms, pre-teach…
Usage and meaning of
initial S/V words.
Meanings of syllable,
vowel, consonant.
The Spalding marking system.
Use procedure in Delivering to
teach attributes of simple sentences.
Use procedure in Delivering to
teach four types of simple sentences.
Use procedure in Delivering to
teach parts of speech.
Use procedure in Delivering to
teach related sentences.
Use procedure in Delivering to
teach the writing process; have
children compose (in whole
group on the board) informative-
narrative, informative, and finally
narrative paragraphs.
Use a board, easel, or SMARTboard
to model composing informative-
narrative, then informative, and
finally narrative paragraphs.
On Academic Day 1, explain that words
consist of individual speech sounds
(phonemic awareness = PA).
Have children say, count, then blend
sounds in Spalding spelling/vocabulary
words in the order listed on WRTR 254-
256. Stop at time because it requires
an understanding of silent final e’s.
(Discontinue counting as soon as
children understand that words
consist of individual sounds.)
Finger-write phonograms o and c first
because they use only the clock face or
part of it.
When you teach line letters, finger write
u after i because both begin with short
lines.
Teach PA in this sequence: isolate
beginning, ending, and then middle
sounds. Use S/V words and words
constructed from the phonograms
previously introduced. Provide massed
practice identifying the same beginning
(then ending) sounds before identifying
different beginning (then ending)
sounds.
Begin spelling dictation when children
can accurately say and write 45
phonograms and have learned the
terms and the Spalding marking system.
Discontinue separate PA activities
because segmenting and blending are
included in dictation.
Important Lesson Planning Considerations
The first week of most kindergarten classrooms is devoted largely to Planning an Environment Conducive To Learning.
The lesson plans that follow are designed to begin on the first Academic Day; that is, when children have learned your class
procedures and are ready to begin spelling, writing, and reading lessons. This chart highlights key points to keep in mind.
 35
Planning
Weeks 1 - 4 Integrated Language Arts Lesson Plan Objectives: Overview
SPELLING
Phonemic
Awareness
		
Segment/blend or count
sounds in me, do, and,
go, at, on, a, it, is, can
run, in, so, no, man,
ten, tan, tin, ton.
Segment/blend sounds
in bed, top, he, will,
we, an, my, up, last,
not, us, am.
Segment/blend sounds
in bad, bed, bid, bud;
bag, beg, big, bog,
bug, had, fed, hog, hid,
did, hug.
Segment/blend sounds
in previously introduced
words.
		Explain/say beginning/
ending sounds of those
words.
Say beginning sounds
and identify same or
different.
Say beginning/ending
sounds in same words
and identify same or
different.
Say ending sounds
and identify same or
different.
Say middle sounds in
dad, dog, gag, and
identify as same or dif-
ferent.
Phonogram
Intro
Explain purpose for
learning phonograms.
Explain purpose for
learning phonograms.
Explain purpose for
learning phonograms.
Explain purpose for
learning phonograms.
		Read sounds o, c, a, d. Read sounds f, g, s, qu. Read sounds b, e, h,
i, u.
Read sounds j, k, l, m,
n.
OPR Read sounds o, c, a, d. Read sounds of clock
letters.
Read sounds of o-i
and u.
Read sounds of o-n and
u.
WPR 		Identify positions
on analog clock, top
and base lines, and
midpoint.
Identify positions
on analog clock, top
and base lines, and
midpoint.
Identify positions
on analog clock, top
and base lines, and
midpoint.
Identify positions
on analog clock, top
and base lines, and
midpoint.
		
Finger write circle and
short and tall lines.
Finger write a circle,
short/tall lines, and a
line that extends below
the base line.
Finger write a circle,
short/tall lines, a line
that extends below
the base line, and a
horizontal line.
Finger write all six
features.
		Say/finger write o, c, a,
d.
Say/finger write clock
letters.
Say/finger write o-i
and u; write on lined
paper.
Say/finger write
previously introduced
phonograms.
Read dad/dog; fad/fog;
gag/gas; sad/sag.
Identify vowels,
consonants, and
syllables.
Identify vowels and
consonants, and
syllables.
Read rhyming words
dad/fad/sad; dog/fog;
gag/sag.
Read bad, bag, bog,
bed, beg, had, bid, big,
hid, hog, bug, hug.
Read previously
introduced words and
words that can be
formed with the new
phonograms.
Read rhyming words
did/hid/bid; bug/
hug and all previously
introduced.
Read all rhyming words
previously introduced.
Component Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4
 36
Planning
Component
Weeks 1 - 4 Integrated Language Arts Lesson Plan Objectives: Overview, cont.
Week 4
Week 3
Week 2
Week 1
Component
WRITING
Word
Usage
Explain the use of me,
do, and, go, at, on, a, it,
is, can, run, in, so, no,
man, ten, tan, tin, ton.
Explain the use of bed,
top, he, will, we, an, my,
up, last, not, us, am, dog,
fog, sad, sag.
Explain the use of bid,
bud; bad, bog, beg,
had, hog, hid, bug,
hug.
Explain the use of
difficult previously
introduced words.
Word
Meaning
Explain the meaning of
difficult words.
Explain the meaning of
difficult words.
Explain the meaning of
difficult words.
Explain the meaning
of difficult words.
Sentence
Construction
		Use the new words in
oral sentences.
		Use the new words in
oral sentences.
		Use the new words in
oral sentences.
		Use the difficult
words in oral
sentences.
Week 4
Week 3
Week 2
Week 1
Reading
Readiness
Hold the book correctly.
and turn pages in the
correct direction.
Point to the correct
direction for reading
text.
		Identify author,
author’s purpose,
characters, and setting
in narrative selections.
		Identify author,
author’s purpose,
characters, setting,
and event in narrative
selections.
		Identify author,
author’s purpose, and
narrative elements in
narrative selections.
Identify the front and
back of book and the
title page.
Identify precise
language.
Identify precise
language, use of
emotional appeal, and
insight.
Identify precise
language.
Identify precise
language and explain
emotional appeal.
Text
Structure
		
Identify author and
illustrator of the
books.
		Identify author’s
purpose, and
characters in
narrative text.
		
Identify author and
illustrator of the books.
		Identify author’s
purpose and setting in
narrative text.
.
		
Identify author and
illustrator of the
books.
		Identify author’s
purpose and event in
narrative text.
		
Identify author and
illustrator of the books.
Identify author’s
purpose and elements
in narrative text.
 44
Planning
1. Sam and Puff D 2, W 10 26 + sh, ee, th, ow
2. A Trip to the Park D 3, W 11 30 + ou, oo, ch, ar
3. Ben Visits the Farm D 4, W 12 34 + ay, ai, oy, oi
4. Mother Helps Tim D 5, W 13 38 + er, ir, ur, wor, ear
5. Her First Nurse Works Early D 10, W 14 38 + er, ir, ur, wor, ear
6. The Flying Fish D 16, W 15 43 + ng, ea, aw, au, or
7. Grandma’s Helper D 17, W 16 48 + ck, wh, ed
8. The New Suit D 18, W 17 51 + ew, ui
9. Learning About Horses W 5, W 18 53 + oa, gu
10. Learning About Dogs W 6, W 19 55 + ph, ough
11. Learning About Cows W 7, W 20 57 + oe, ey
12. Learning About Sheep W 8, W 21 59 + igh, kn
13. Learning About Wild Cats W 9, W 22 61 + gn, wr
14. Learning About Birds W 10, W 23 63 + ie, dge
15. Learning About Deer W 11, W 24 65 + ei, eigh
16. Learning About Bears W 12, W 25 67 + ti, si, ci
17. Touring the Public Library W 13, W 26 70 (selected)
18. A Visit to the County Fair W 14, W 27 70 (selected)
19. A Tour of the Fire Station W 15, W 28 70 (selected)
20. A Trip to the Animal Shelter W 16, W 29 70 (selected)
Spalding’s Series 1 Leveled Readers are used to practice fluent and expressive reading. One book per student is
recommended. Additional recommended kindergarten books are listed on the SEI website <www.spalding.org>. Click on
Support, then Recommended Literature.
Reading: Spalding’s Learning to Read and Loving It Series 1 Leveled Readers
BOOK # AND TITLE INITIAL USE: DAYS/WEEKS PHONOGRAMS PRACTICED
 45
Planning
The Kissing Hand* Penn, Audrey Tanglewood Press		 Day 2 (R), Week 21 (W)
Muncha, Muncha, Muncha Fleming, Candace Atheneum Books for		 Day 4 (R), Week 25 (R)
				 Young Readers
The Very Lazy Ladybug Finn, Isabel Tiger Tales		 Day 5 (R), Week 21 (R/W)
In the Tall, Tall Grass* Fleming, Denise Square Fish		 Day 8 (R), Week 5 (R)
Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type* Cronin, Doreen Simon & Schuster Books		 Day 9, Week 5 (R), Week 22 (W)
				 for Young Readers
A Sick Day for Amos McGee Stead, Philip C. Roaring Brook Press		 Day 13 (R)
The Three Billy Goats Gruff* Galdone, Paul Sandpiper		 Day 14 (R), Week 26 (R)
Frederick* Lionni, Leo Dragonfly Books		 Day 17 (R), Week 27 (R)
May I Bring a Friend? Schenk De Regniers, Beatrice Aladdin		 Day 19 (R)
Goodnight Moon Brown, Margaret Wise HarperCollins		 Day 20 (R)
The Snowy Day* Keats, Ezra Jack Puffin		 Week 5, 23 (R)
Oranges Snyder, Inez Children’s Press		 Week 6, 21 (R)
Apples		 Snyder, Inez Children’s Press		 Week 6, 25 (R)
The Farm Saunders-Smith, Gail Capstone Press		 Week 7, 22 (R)
Carrots Snyder, Inez Children’s Press		 Week 7, Week 24 (R)
Boat Book* Gibbons, Gail Holiday House		 Week 8 (R)
Cranberries Snyder, Inez Children’s Press		 Week 8, 10 (R)
Trucks* Barton, Byron HarperFestival		 Week 9 (R)
Tomatoes Snyder, Inez Children’s Press		 Week 9 (R), Week 10, 26, (R)
Boats*		 Barton, Byron HarperFestival		 Week 10 (R)
Planes* Barton, Byron HarperFestival		 Week 11 (R)
The Napping House Wood, Audrey Houghton Mifflin Harcourt		 Week 11, 24 (R)
Llama Llama Time to Share* Dewdney, Anna Viking Juvenile		 Week 12 (R)
Bats 		 Wood, Lily Scholastic Inc.		 Week 12, 28 (R)
White Rabbit’s Color Book Baker, Alan Kingfisher Books		 Week 13 (R)
I Love Trains Sturges, Philemon HarperCollins		 Week 14, 27 (R)
Brown Rabbit’s Shape Book Baker, Alan Kingfisher Books		 Week 15 (R)
A Busy Year Lionni, Leo Knopf Books for Young Readers		 Week 15 (R)
My Friend Whale James, Simon Walker Books Ltd.		 Week 16, 23 (R)
If You Give a Mouse a Cookie* Numeroff, Laura Joffe HarperFestival		 Week 17 (R)
I Love Bugs Sturges, Philemon HarperCollins		 Week 18 (R)
Life in a Pond Fowler, Allan Children’s Press		 Week 19, 28 (R)
Learning About Cows, Lapsley, Sarah Spalding Education International Week 29 (R)
Learning About Horses
20th Century Children’s Poetry Schulman, Janet Knopf Books for Young Readers		 Week 29, 31 (R)
Treasury
Learning About Deer, Lapsley, Sarah Spalding Education International Week 30 (R)
Learning About Bears
Bill Martin’s Big Book of Poetry Martin Jr., Bill Simon & Schuster Books 		 Week 30 (R), Week 32 (R/W)
				 for Young Readers
The Carrot Seed* Krauss, Ruth HarperCollins		 Week 31 (R)
The Very Hungry Caterpillar* Carle, Eric Philomel Books		 Week 32 (R)
* Can be obtained in eBook format. Books listed are used for teaching attributes of literary appreciation, text structure, and
mental actions. Only one teacher copy is needed.
R = Used in reading lessons; W = Used in writing lessons.
Reading: Children’s Literatore for Direct Teaching
TITLE AUTHOR PUBLISHER DAYS/WEEKS USED
 46
Planning
 47
Planning
Kindergarten
Integrated
Language Arts
Lesson Objectives
 48
Planning
Tips
Spelling
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the task.
For PA objectives 1-2, use finger
cues to identify individual
phonemes (sounds) in these words.
Phonemic awareness activities
are critical for children making
connections between the speech
sounds and letters. Do not write the
words on the board for practicing
phonemic awareness (see
Delivering for procedure).
Spelling is given less time on days
1-3 than reading because initial
phonemic awareness activities
take less time than reading and
discussing a story.
For SP objectives 3-4, use the
Feature Formation poster and Clock
Face Card.
Writing
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the task.
For SCV objectives, more words
are analyzed for word usage than
for meaning because sections A-G
words are in the spoken vocabulary
of most kindergartners and
many cannot be defined easily.
If your children need vocabulary
development, provide sentences that
help with the usage and meaning of
the words.
For SCV objectives, the language
skills are in italics; the day’s
spelling words are underlined.
For SCV objectives 1-3, use the
dialogues in WRTR 96-103 as
patterns for teaching word usage
and meaning.
Academic Day 1
Spelling: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Explain that me, do, and, go, at are made up of individual speech sounds
(M/CK/C: Delivering 5-6). 
2. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words me, do, and, go, at (M/CK/C:
Delivering 5-6). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for learning phonograms (M/CK/C: Delivering 7). 
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct sitting position (M/CK/C:
WRTR 38).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-
WRTR 41-42). 
4. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when finger
writing a circle that begins at two on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face
Card-WRTR 42). 
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of me, do, and, go, at in oral sentences,
e.g., “Give the book to me.” Me takes the place of the speaker’s name; “Sam, do
your work.” Do is an action word that shows something is happening now (M/CK:
		 WRTR 96-99). 
2. Listen to the teacher explain that at shows a relationship between words to
explain where, e.g., “The children are at school.”; at shows a relationship
between school and children; the words at school tell where the children are (C:
WRTR 96-99). 
3. Compose oral sentences using me, do, and, go, at (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name
a, b, c, d, e (M/CK/C). 
Weeks 1 - 4: Daily Integrated Language Arts Lesson Objectives
 49
Planning
Academic Day 1, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Reading Readiness (RR)
1. Hold book correctly and turn pages in correct direction (M/CK/C).
2. Point to correct direction for reading text (M/CK/C).
3. Identify front and back of book and title page (M/CK/C).
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to teacher identify the author and illustrator of The Kissing Hand* by
Audrey Penn; explain the role of each in telling the story (M/CK). 
2. Listen to teacher model narrative text structure using The Kissing Hand*;
identify who it is about (Chester Raccoon and Mrs. Raccoon), where and when it
happened (edge of the forest during the day), and what part of the story was most
enjoyable (Mrs. Raccoon told Chester about a family secret called the Kissing
Hand) (M/CK/C). 
Reading
M/CK/C means model new learning,
ask Check for Understanding
questions, then coach as children
attempt the task.
For TS objectives, the asterisk
beside The Kissing Hand means
use an alternative selection that
is a good example for teaching
narrative text structure.
For TS objectives, continue to read
the story for enjoyment before
using it as instruction for text
structure.
For TS objectives, use general terms
for narrative elements on Academic
Day 1.
Tips
 50
Planning
Tips
Spelling
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the
task.
For PA objectives 1-2, use finger
cues to identify individual
phonemes (sounds) in these
words. Phonemic awareness
activities are critical for
children making connections
between the speech sounds and
letters. Do not write the words
on the board for practicing
phonemic awareness (see
Delivering for procedure).
For SP objectives 5-6, the
phonogram o is introduced
first in kindergarten because it
is formed with one feature, a
circle.
Writing
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the
task.
For SCV objectives, the language
skills are in italics; the day’s
spelling words are underlined.
For SCV objectives 1-3, use the
dialogues in WRTR 96-103 as
patterns for teaching word
usage and meaning.
Academic Day 2
Spelling: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Explain that on, a, it, is are made up of individual speech sounds (M/CK/C:
Delivering 5-6). 
2. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words on, a, it, is (M/CK/C: Delivering 5-6). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for learning phonograms (C: Delivering 7).
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct sitting position (C: WRTR 38).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 41-42).
4. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a
circle that begins at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
5. Read (say sounds) phonogram o (M/CK/C: WRTR 46). 
6. Say and finger write phonogram o beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand,
Clock Face Card-WRTR 46). 
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of on, a, it, is in oral sentences, e.g., “Tim has
a toy.” The word a tells that a thing (toy) is coming (M/CK: WRTR 99-101). 
2. Listen to the teacher explain that on shows a relationship between words to explain
where, e.g., “The books are on the table.” On shows a relationship between the words
table and books; on the table tells where the books are (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using on, a, it, is (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name
f, g, h, i, j; review a-e (M/CK/C). 
 51
Planning
Academic Day 2, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Reading Readiness (RR)
1. Hold book correctly and turn pages in correct direction (C).
2. Point to correct direction for reading text (C).
3. Identify front and back of book and title page (C).
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to teacher explain that a narrative relates an event or tells a story and that
the author’s purpose is to entertain and to develop understanding about people and
the world (M/CK). 
2. Listen to teacher explain that a character in a narrative is a person or an animal or
object that takes on the actions of a person, e.g., “An animal or object is a character
if it talks or has feelings like a person.” (M/CK). 
3. Listen to teacher model narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 1 and identify
author’s purpose and characters, e.g., “The author’s purpose is to entertain and
help you understand people and the world. The characters are Harvey, mother, and
father.” (M/CK). 
Reading
M/CK means model new
learning ask children Check
for Understanding questions,
then coach as children attempt
the task.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
teach author’s purpose and
characters in narrative text
structure.
For TS objectives, use Elements
of Narratives poster to help
visualize the elements.
For TS objectives, use the
example dialogue on WRTR
136-138 as your model for
demonstrating and explaining
narrative text structure.
Tips
 52
Planning
Spelling
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the
task.
For PA objectives 1-2, use finger
cues to identify individual
phonemes (sounds) in these
words. Phonemic awareness
activities are critical for
children making connections
between the speech sounds and
letters. Do not write the words
on the board for practicing
phonemic awareness (see
Delivering for procedure).
For SP objectives 5-6, the
phonogram c is introduced next
because it is formed with part
of a circle.
Writing
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the
task.
For SCV objectives, the language
skills are in italics; the day’s
spelling words are underlined.
For SCV objectives 1-3, use
dialogues in WRTR 96-103 as
patterns for teaching usage
and meaning of unfamiliar S/V
words.
Tips
Academic Day 3
Spelling: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Explain that can, run, in are made up of individual speech sounds (M/CK/C:
Delivering 5-6). 
2. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words can, run, in (M/CK/C: Delivering 5-6). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for learning phonograms (C: Delivering 7).
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct sitting position (C: WRTR 38).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 41-42).
4. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a
circle that begins at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
5. Read (say sounds) phonogram c (M/CK/C: WRTR 45). 
6. Say and finger write phonogram c beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand,
Clock Face Card-WRTR 45). 
7. Read (say) phonograms o and c (M/CK/C: OPR Step 1-Delivering 9-10).
8. Say and finger write phonograms o and c beginning at two on the clock
(M/CK/C: WPR Step 1-Delivering 20).
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of can, run, in in oral sentences, e.g., “The
can fell off the shelf.” The word can tells what the sentence is about (M/CK). 
2. Listen to the teacher explain that in shows a relationship between words to explain
where, e.g., “The marbles are in the jar.” In shows a relationship between jar and
marbles; in the jar tells where the marbles are (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using can, run, in (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name k, l,
m, n, o; review a-j (M/CK/C). 
 53
Planning
Academic Day 3, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Reading Readiness (RR)
1. Hold book correctly and turn pages in correct direction (C).
2. Point to correct direction for reading text (C).
3. Identify front and back of book and title page (C).
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative relates an event or tells a story and that the author’s
purpose is to entertain and to develop understanding about people and the world
(C). 
2. Explain that a character in a narrative is a person or an animal or object that takes
on the actions of a person, e.g., “An animal or object is a character if it talks or has
feelings like a person.” (C). 
3. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 29; identify author’s purpose
and characters, e.g., “The story is a narrative. The author’s purpose is to entertain
and develop understanding about people and the world. The characters are John and
his mother.” (C). 
Tips
Reading
M/CK/C means model each
new learning, ask Check for
Understanding questions, then
coach as children attempt the
task.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
provide massed practice
of author’s purpose and
characters in narrative text
structure.
For TS objectives, use Elements
of Narratives poster to
help children visualize the
elements.
 54
Planning
Tips
Academic Day 4
Spelling: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Explain that so, no, man are made up of individual speech sounds (C).
2. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words so, no, man (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for learning phonograms (C).
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a
circle that begins at 2 on the clock (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42). 
6. Explain the meanings of short and tall; identify short and tall lines (M/CK/C:
Clock Face Card-WRTR 42). 
7. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing short and tall lines (M/CK/C).
8. Read (say) phonogram a (M/CK/C: WRTR 45).
9. Say and finger write phonogram a beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand,
Clock Face Card-WRTR 45).
10. Read (say) phonograms o, c, a (M/CK/C: OPR Step 1-Delivering 9-10).
11. Say and finger write phonograms o, c, a beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C:
		 WPR Step 1-Delivering 20).
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of so, no, man in oral sentences, e.g., “The
man forgot his hat.” The word man tells who the sentence is about (M/CK).
2. Listen to the teacher explain that so means a great deal, e.g., “I love my pet so
much.” (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using so, no, man (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name
p, q, r, s, t; review a-o (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For SP objectives 5-6,
introduce top and base lines
and midpoint in this lesson to
prepare children for learning
letters that begin with a line.
Use the Spalding Feature
Formation poster and Clock
Face Card.
For SP objective 6, use two
stacked blocks to demonstrate
height of a tall letter and one
block to demonstrate height of
a short letter.
Writing
For SCV objectives 2-3,
the word so is selected for
vocabulary development
because there are multiple
meanings. The sample sentence
given is the easiest definition
for kindergartners.
 55
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use Elements
of Narratives poster to
help children visualize the
elements.
For TS and LA objectives, use
narrative picture books to
provide massed practice of
narrative text structure and
attributes of fine literature.
For TS and LA objectives,
continue to read the story for
enjoyment before using it as
instruction for text structure
and literary appreciation.
For TS and LA objectives,
the asterisk beside Muncha,
Muncha, Muncha means
use an available alternative
selection that is a good
example for teaching narrative
text structure and the
attributes of fine literature.
For LA objectives, use example
dialogue in WRTR 132-133 as
a model for demonstrating and
explaining the Attributes of
Fine Literature.
Academic Day 4, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative relates an event or tells a story and that the author’s
purpose is to entertain and to develop understanding about people and the
world (C). 
2. Explain that a character in a narrative is a person or an animal or object that takes
on the actions of a person, e.g., “An animal or object is a character if it talks or has
feelings like a person.” (C). 
3. Listen to teacher identify the author and illustrator of Muncha, Muncha, Muncha*
by Candace Fleming; explain the role of each in telling the story (M/CK). 
4. Listen to narrative text structure using Muncha, Muncha, Muncha*; identify
author’s purpose and characters, e.g., “The story is a narrative. The author’s purpose
is to entertain and develop understanding about people and the world. The character
is Mr. McGreely. The bunnies are not characters because they do not act like people.”
(C). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use emotional appeal to describe situations or events that
cause us to feel in certain ways. We call how we feel emotions. When authors clearly
describe how characters feel, we often remember feeling the same way (M/CK/C). 
2. Listen to excerpts of Muncha, Muncha, Muncha*; explain how emotional appeal
reminds us of happiness, sadness, fear, or compassion and identify examples, e.g.,
“The next morning, when Mr. McGreely saw his chewed stems, his nibbled leaves,
and his gnawed sprouts, he was really, really angry.” (M/CK/C). 
Tips
 56
Planning
Spelling
For PA objectives 3-4, expand
phonemic awareness by
comparing different beginning
and ending sounds.
For SP objective 5, use two
stacked blocks to demonstrate
height of a tall letter and one
block to demonstrate height of
a short letter.
Writing
For SCV objectives 1-3,
continue emphasizing usage
and meaning of unfamiliar S/V
words for building vocabulary.
For SCV objective 4, work with
children in small group who
need extra practice saying the
alphabet letters.
Tips
Academic Day 5
Spelling: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Explain that ten, tan, tin, ton are made up of individual speech sounds (C).
2. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words ten, tan, tin, ton (C).
3. Explain the meaning of beginning sound and say beginning sound in ten, tan, tin,
ton (M/CK/C). 
4. Explain the meaning of ending sound and say the ending sound in ten, tan, tin, ton
(M/CK/C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for learning phonograms (C).
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
5. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a
circle, a short, and a tall line (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face Card-WRTR 42). 
6. Read (say) phonogram d (M/CK/C: WRTR 45).
7. Say/finger write phonogram d beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock
Face Card-WRTR 45).
8. Read (say) phonograms o, c, a, d (M/CK/C: OPR Step 1-Delivering 9-10).
9. Say and finger write phonograms o, c, a, d beginning at 2 on the clock
(M/CK/C: WPR Step 1-Delivering 20).
Writing: The student will … ≈10 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of ten, tan, tin, ton in oral sentences, e.g.,
“His shirt is tan or light brown.” The word tan tells what color his shirt is
		 (M/CK). 
2. Explain the meanings of ten (number), tan (color), tin (metal), ton (heavy
weight); “An elephant weighs more than a ton.” (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using ten, tan, tin, ton (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name
u, v, w, x, y, z; review a-t (M/CK/C). 
 57
Planning
Reading
For TS and LA objectives, use
narrative picture books to
provide massed practice of
narrative text structure and
attributes of fine literature.
For TS objectives, continue to
read the story for enjoyment
before using it as instruction
for text structure.
For TS and LA objectives,
the asterisk beside A Very
Lazy Ladybug means use an
available alternative selection
that is a good example for
teaching narrative text
structure and the attributes of
fine literature.
For LA objectives, use example
dialogue in WRTR 131-132 as
a model for demonstrating and
explaining the Attributes of
Fine Literature.
Academic Day 5, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative relates an event or tells a story and that the author’s
purpose is to entertain and to develop understanding about people and the world
(C). 
2. Explain that a character in a narrative is a person or an animal or object that takes
on the actions of a person, e.g., “An animal or object is a character if it talks or has
feelings like a person.” (C). 
3. Identify the author and illustrator of The Very Lazy Ladybug* by Isobel Finn;
explain the role of each in telling the story (C). 
4. Listen to narrative text structure using The Very Lazy Ladybug*; identify author’s
purpose and characters, e.g., “The story is a narrative. The author’s purpose is to
entertain and develop understanding about people and the world. The character is a
ladybug. The ladybug is acting lazy and wants to sleep all day and night.” (C). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Listen to teacher explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly
describe people, animals, places, and events (M/CK). 
2. Listen to excerpts of The Very Lazy Ladybug*; explain how precise language (word
choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples, e.g., “But the tiger liked to ROAR! ‘I
can’t sleep here,’ said the lazy ladybug. ‘It’s too noisy.’” (M/CK/C). 
Tips
 58
Planning
Academic Day 6
Spelling: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words bed, top, he, will (C).
2. Say beginning sounds in spoken words and/at and it/is/in and identify as same or
different (C). 
3. Say ending sounds in go/so/no and me/he and identify as same or different (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (M/CK/C: WRTR 43).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct pencil grip (M/CK/C: WRTR 38-39).
4. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
6. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle, a short line, and a
tall line (C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42). 
7. Read (say) phonogram f (M/CK/C: WRTR 46).
8. Say/finger write phonogram f beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock
Face Card-WRTR 46).
9. Read (say) phonograms o, c, a, d, f (C: OPR Step 1).
10. Say/finger write phonograms o, c, a, d, f beginning at 2 on the clock
(C: WPR Step 1).
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of bed, top, he, will in oral sentences, e.g.,
“Kyle ran. He ran.”; the word he takes the place of the name Kyle. (M/CK). 
2. Listen to the teacher explain the meaning of top as the highest point and will as a
desire or wish, e.g., “They climbed to the top of the mountain. We will do our best.”
(M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using bed, top, he, will (C). 
4. Say each lower case alphabet letter in order (C). 
Spelling
For PA objectives 2-3, during
the day, question children
about beginning and ending
sounds in words they use.
For SP objective 6, plan small
group practice for children
having difficulty with correct
directionality.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
Writing
For SCV objectives 1-3,
continue emphasizing usage
and meaning of unfamiliar S/V
words for building vocabulary.
For SCV objective 4, work with
children in small group who
need extra practice saying the
alphabet letters.
Tips
 59
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose and
characters before identifying
setting.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
provide massed practice of
author’s purpose and setting in
narrative text structure.
Academic Day 6, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to teacher explain that a narrative also has a setting. The setting is the time
and place where the story happened (M/CK). 
2. Listen to teacher model narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 16 and
identify the setting, e.g., “The setting is one day in the living room of an old house.”
(M/CK). 
3. Identify the character in narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 16 (C). 
Tips
 60
Planning
Academic Day 7
Spelling: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words we, an, my, up, last (C).
2. Say beginning sounds in spoken words and/at/an and me/man/my and identify as
same or different (C).
3. Say ending sounds in and/bed and at/it/last and identify as same or different (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct pencil grip (M/CK/C: WRTR 38-39).
4. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
6. Explain purpose/demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a straight
line that begins at the midpoint and extends the same distance below the base line
(M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
7. Read (say) phonogram g (M/CK/C: WRTR 46).
8. Say/finger write phonogram g beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock
Face Card-WRTR 46).
9. Read (say) phonograms o, c, a, d, f, g (C: OPR Step 1). 
10. Say/finger write phonograms o, c, a, d, f, g beginning at 2 on the clock (C: WPR
Step 1). 
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of we, an, my, up, last in oral sentences, e.g.,
“My backpack is green.”; the word my takes the place of the speaker’s name; “The
balloon goes up.”; the word up tells where the balloon goes. (M/CK). 
2. Listen to the teacher explain the meaning of last as being at the end and an as a
word used before a vowel sound, e.g., “Jim is the last in line.”“ I gave my teacher an
apple.” (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using we, an, my, up, last (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say the name of each capital letter,
e.g., A, B, C, D, E (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For SP objectives 9 (OPR)
and 10 (WPR), have children
practice every day to develop
accurate and automatic
response.
Writing
For SCV objectives 1-3,
continue emphasizing usage
and meaning of unfamiliar S/V
words for building vocabulary.
Tips
 61
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose and
characters before identifying
setting.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
provide massed practice of
author’s purpose and setting in
narrative text structure.
Academic Day 7, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative also has a setting. The setting is the time and place where
the story happened (C). 
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 21 and identify the setting,
e.g., “The setting is one day at home.” (C). 
3. Identify the characters in narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 21(C). 
Tips
 62
Planning
Academic Day 8
Spelling: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/count/blend sounds in spoken words not, us, am (C).
2. Say beginning sounds in spoken words no/not; up/us; an/am and identify as same
or different (C).
3. Say ending sounds in can/run/in/man and identify as same or different (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Demonstrate correct pencil grip (C).
4. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
6. Explain purpose/demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a straight
line that begins at the midpoint and extends the same distance below the base line
(M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
7. Read (say) phonogram s (M/CK/C: WRTR 46).
8. Say/finger write phonogram s beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock
Face Card-WRTR 46). 
9. Read (say) phonograms o, c, a, d, f, g, s (C: OPR Step 1).
10. Say/finger write phonograms o, c, a, d, f, g, s beginning at 2 on the clock
(C: WPR Step 1).
Writing: The student will … ≈10 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of not, us, am in oral sentences, e.g., “I am
six.”; the word am connects six to I (M/CK).
2. Listen to the teacher explain the meaning of not as a word used with verbs to form
a negative statement, e.g., “I am cold. I am not cold.” “James is here. James is not
here.” (M/CK).
3. Compose oral sentences using not, us, am (C).
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say the name of each capital letter,
e.g., F, G, H, I, J; review A-E (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For SP objective 8, emphasize
that the letter s should
fit inside a circle. Use the
Spalding Letter Formation
poster and Clock Face Card.
Tips
 63
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose and
characters before identifying
setting.
For TS and LA objectives, use
narrative picture books to
provide massed practice of
narrative text structure and
attributes of fine literature.
For TS and LA objectives, the
asterisk beside In The Tall,
Tall Grass means use an
available alternative selection
that is a good example for
teaching narrative text
structure and the attributes of
fine literature.
Academic Day 8, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative also has a setting. The setting is the time and place where
the story happened (C). 
2. Identify the author and illustrator of In the Tall, Tall Grass* by Denise Fleming;
explain the role of each in telling the story (C). 
3. Listen to narrative text structure using In the Tall, Tall Grass* and identify the
setting, e.g., “The setting is one day in the tall, tall grass.” (C). 
4. Identify the characters in narrative text structure using In the Tall, Tall Grass*
(C). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C).
2. Listen to excerpts of In the Tall, Tall Grass*; explain how precise language (word
choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples, e.g., “hip, hop, ears flop” (C). 
Tips
 64
Planning
Academic Day 9
Spelling: The student will … ≈30 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say beginning sounds in dad/dog, fad/fog, gag/gas, sad/sag and identify as same or
different (C).
2. Say ending sounds in dad/fad/sad, dog/fog/sag and identify as same or different (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position (C).
3. Demonstrate correct pencil grip (C).
4. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
6. Explain purpose/demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a straight line
that begins at the midpoint and extends the same distance below the base line
		 (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
7. Read (say) phonogram qu (M/CK/C: WRTR 47). 
8. Say/finger write phonogram qu beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock
Face Card-WRTR 47). 
9. Read (say) phonograms that begin at 2 on the clock (C: OPR Step 1).
10. Say/finger write phonograms that begin at 2 on the clock (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read dad/dog; fad/fog; gag/gas; sad/sag (from board/easel, or SMARTboard) for
spelling and for reading (M/CK/C: Delivering 29-32). 
2. Explain words that rhyme have the same middle and ending sound; read words on the
board/easel/SMARTboard that rhyme: dad/fad/sad; dog/fog; gag/sag (M/CK/C). 
Writing: The student will … ≈10 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of dog and fog in oral sentences, e.g., “The dog
barks loudly.”; the word dog tells what the sentence is about; “The fog was thick in the
morning.”; the word fog tells what the sentence is about (M/CK).
2. Listen to the teacher explain that fog means tiny drops of water that form a cloud near
the ground, e.g., “We couldn’t see through the fog on our way to school. ” (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using dog and fog (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say the name of each capital letter, e.g.,
K. L, M, N, O; review A-J (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For SP objectives 7-8, explain
that it takes two letters /kw/ to
say the phonogram qu (rule
1).
For HFV objectives 1-2, print
words on the board/easel or
SMARTboard.
Writing
For SCV objectives 2-3, if
needed, find a picture from
a book or the internet that
illustrates fog.
Tips
 65
Planning
Reading
For TS and LA objectives, use
narrative picture books to
provide massed practice of
narrative text structure and
attributes of fine literature.
Academic Day 9, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative also has a setting. The setting is the time and place where
the story happened (C).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type* by Doreen
Cronin; explain the role of each in telling the story (C). 
3. Listen to narrative text structure using Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type* and
identify the setting, e.g., “The setting is one day on Farmer Brown’s farm.” (C). 
4. Identify the characters in narrative text structure using Click, Clack, Moo Cows That
Type* (C). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C).
2. Listen to excerpts of Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type*; explain how precise
language (word choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples, e.g., “Dear Farmer
Brown, The barn is very cold at night. We’d like some electric blankets. Sincerely, The
Cows.” (C). 
Tips
 66
Planning
Academic Day 10
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say beginning sounds in dad/fad/sad, dog/fog, gag/sag and identify as same or
different (C). 
2. Say ending sounds in dad/dog, fad/fog, sad/sag and identify as same or different
(C). 
3. Say middle (medial) sounds in bad, bag, bog (M/CK/C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position and pencil grip (C).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle, a short line, a tall
line, and a line that extends the same distance below the base line (C: Clock Face
Card).
6. Explain general handwriting rules (M/CK/C: WRTR 42-44).
7. Read (say) phonograms that begin at 2 on the clock (C: OPR Step 1).
8. Say/finger write/write phonograms that begin at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: air, sand,
Clock Face Card-Spalding 5/8” lined paper-WRTR 15). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read dad/dog, fad/fog, gag/gas, sad/sag (written on the board/easel or
SMARTboard)) for spelling and for reading (M/CK/C: Delivering 29-32). 
2. Read and explain why these words rhyme: dad/fad/sad; dog/fog; gag/sag (C).
3. Match words (written on board/easel/SMARTboard) that have the same ending
sounds: dad/fad/sad, dog/fog/gag/sag (M/CK/C). 
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain the usage of sad, sag in oral sentences, e.g., “Tim felt
sad when his friend had to go home.”; the word sad tells how Tim felt; “The old bed
sags in the middle.”; the word sags tells what the bed does (M/CK).
2. Listen to the teacher explain that sad means unhappy and sag means to hang
down or sink, e.g., “I felt sad when I lost my best toy. The bed may sag if you put
something heavy on it.” (M/CK). 
3. Compose oral sentences using sad and sag (C). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say the name of each capital letter,
e.g., P, Q, R, S, T; review A-O (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For PA objectives 1-3, use
finger cues to help children
discriminate different
beginning, ending, and middle
(medial) vowel sounds.
For SP objective 8, have
children write single-letter
phonograms across the page to
practice spacing letters close
but not touching.
Increase time for writing
phonograms.
For HFV objectives 1-3,
have children read words
written on the board/easel or
SMARTboard.
For HFV objective 2, emphasize
words that rhyme have the
same middle and ending
sounds.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objectives 2-3, if
needed, find a picture from
a book or the internet that
illustrates sag.
 67
Planning
Reading
For TS objective, use a McCall-
Harby lesson to provide
massed practice of author’s
purpose, characters, and
setting in narrative text
structure.
Academic Day 10, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 22; identify the author’s
purpose, characters, and setting, e.g., “The story is a narrative. The author’s purpose
is to entertain and develop understanding of people and the world. The characters
are Jean and mother. The elephant is not a character because it does not talk or act
like a person. The setting is one day at the zoo.” (C). 
Tips
 68
Planning
Academic Day 11
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend sounds in bad, bed, bid, bud; bag, beg, big, bog, bug (C).
2. Say beginning/ending sounds in bad, bed, bid, bud; bag, beg, big, bog, bug (C).
3. Say middle (medial) sounds in dad, dog, gag (M/CK/C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position and pencil grip (C).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle, a short line, a tall
line, and a line that extends the same distance below the base line (C: Clock Face
Card).
6. Explain general handwriting rules (M/CK/C: WRTR 42-44).
7. Read (say) phonogram b (M/CK/C: WRTR 49).
8. Say/finger write/write phonogram b (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face Card-Spalding
5/8” lined paper-phonogram introduction-WRTR 15, 49).
9. Read (say) phonograms o to b (C: OPR Step 1).
10. Say and write phonograms o-b on Spalding 5/8” lined paper (C: WPR Step 1). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read bad, bag, bog (written on the board) for spelling and for reading (M/CK/C:
Delivering 29-32). 
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that bid means to offer a price for a thing and bud
means an unopened flower, e.g., “My dad bid on a new car. The bud will soon
become a pretty flower.” (M/CK). 
2. Compose oral sentences using bid and bud (C). 
3. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say the name of each capital letter,
e.g., U, V, W, X, Y, Z; review A-T (M/CK/C).
Spelling
For PA objective 3, use
finger cues to help children
discriminate different middle
(medial) vowel sounds.
For SP objective 10, have
children write single-letter
phonograms across the page to
practice spacing letters close
but not touching.
For SP objective 10, increase
time for writing phonograms.
For HFV objective 1, add only
bad, bag, bog to words written
on board/easel/SMARTboard
because these are the
phonograms that have been
introduced.
For HFV objective 1, read
previously introduced words as
time permits.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
From now on, the term board
will represent board, easel, or
SMARTboard.
Writing
For SCV objectives 1-2,
continue to use dialogues on
WRTR 96-103 as patterns for
teaching usage and meaning of
S/V words.
Tips
 69
Planning
Academic Day 11, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to teacher explain that the action that happens in a narrative is called an
event (plot) (M/CK). 
2. Listen to teacher model narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 2 and identify
the event, e.g., “Charles teaches his parakeet, Herman, to do tricks.” (M/CK). 
3. Identify characters and setting in narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 2
		 (C). 
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose, characters,
and setting before identifying
event.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
provide massed practice
of event in narrative text
structure.
Tips
 70
Planning
Academic Day 12
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend sounds in bad, bed, bid, bud; bag, beg, big, bog, bug (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2 on
the clock, a short line, a tall line, and a line that extends the same distance below the
base line (C).
3. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a horizontal line that begins
at 9 on the clock and ends at 3 (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42). 
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Explain general handwriting rules (M/CK/C: WRTR 42-44).
6. Say/finger write/write phonogram e (M/CK/C: air, sand, Clock Face Card-Spalding
5/8” lined paper-phonogram introduction-WRTR 15, 50).
7. Read (say) phonograms o to e (C: OPR Step 1).
8. Say and write phonograms o to e (C: WPR Step 1). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read bad, bed, bag, beg, bog (written on the board) for spelling and for reading
		 (C). 
2. Match words (written on the board) that have the same middle (medial)sound, e.g.,
bad/bag; bed/beg (M/CK/C).
Writing: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that bad means unpleasant or harmful and bog means
wet and muddy ground, e.g., “Some foods may taste bad. The truck is stuck in the
muddy bog.”(M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using bad and bog (C). 
3. Say each capital alphabet letter A-Z in order (C).
Spelling
For PA objective 1, use
finger cues to help children
discriminate middle (medial)
vowel and ending consonant
(phonemic awareness).
For SP objective 3, refer to the
Spalding Feature Formation
poster and Alphabet Strips to
make it multisensory.
For SP objective 8, have
children write single-letter
phonograms across the page to
practice spacing letters close
but not touching.
For SP objective 8, increase
time for writing phonograms.
For HFV objective 1, add bed
and beg to words written on
the board because phonogram
e is introduced this day;
have children read words for
spelling and for reading to
develop word fluency.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from HFV
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 71
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose, characters,
and setting before identifying
event.
For TS objectives, use a
McCall-Harby lesson to
provide massed practice
of event in narrative text
structure.
Academic Day 12, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the action that happens in a narrative is called an event (plot) (C). 
2. Listen to McCall-Harby 25 and identify the event, e.g., “Harry wants to join his
father’s band.” (C). 
3. Identify characters and setting in narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 25
(C). 
Tips
 72
Planning
Academic Day 13
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend sounds in bad, had, beg, fed (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2 on
the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends the same distance below the
base line, and a horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5. Say/finger write/write phonogram h (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-
		 WRTR 15, 50).
6. Read (say) phonograms o to h (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to h (C: WPR Step 1). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read bad, bed, bag, beg, bog, had (written on board) for spelling and for reading
(C). 
2. Match words (written on the board) that have the same middle (medial) sound, e.g.,
bad/had; bed/fed (M/CK/C).
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that beg means to ask eagerly and had means
something has already happened, e.g., “My pets beg for a treat. Sally had a cold last
week.” (M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using beg and had (C). 
Spelling
For PA objective 1, use
finger cues to help children
discriminate the same or
different middle (medial)
sound and ending consonant
sound.
For SCV objective 7, have
children continue writing
single-letter phonograms
across the page for practicing
spacing.
For HFV objective 1, have
children read words for
spelling and for reading to
develop word fluency.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from HFV
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 73
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, review
author’s purpose, characters,
and setting before identifying
event.
For TS and LA objectives,
use narrative picture books
to provide massed practice
of event in narrative text
structure and attributes of fine
literature.
Academic Day 13, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the action that happens in a narrative is called an event (plot) (C). 
2. Identify the author and illustrator of A Sick Day for Amos McGee* by Philip C. Stead
(C).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using A Sick Day for Amos McGee* and identify
an event in the story, e.g., “When Amos is too sick to make it to the zoo, his animal
friends return the favor by visiting him.” (C). 
4. Identify characters and setting in narrative text structure using A Sick Day for Amos
McGee* (C). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C).
2. Listen to excerpts of A Sick Day for Amos McGee*; explain how precise language
(word choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples (C). 
3. Explain that authors use emotional appeal to describe situations or events that
cause us to feel in certain ways. We call how we feel emotions. When authors clearly
describe how characters feel, we often remember feeling the same way (C).
4. Listen to excerpts of A Sick Day for Amos McGee*; explain how emotional appeal
reminds us of happiness, sadness, fear, or compassion and identify examples, e.g.,
“One day Amos awoke with the sniffles, and the sneezes, and the chills. He swung
his achy legs out of bed, curled them back again and said, ‘Ugh, I don’t think I’ll be
going to work today.’” (C). 
Tips
 74
Planning
Academic Day 14
Spelling: The student will ... ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend sounds in bog, hog; bid, big, hid (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2 on
the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends the same distance below the
base line, and a horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5. Say/finger write/write phonogram i (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-WRTR 15,
50).
6. Read (say) phonograms o to i (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to i (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read bad, bed, bid; bag, beg, big; had, hid, hog (written on the board) for spelling
and for reading (C). 
2. Match words (written on the board) that have the same middle (medial) sound, e. g.,
bad/bag/had; bid/big/hid (M/CK/C).
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that hog means a male pig and hid means to put out of
sight, e.g., “The big hog scared me when he oinked. John hid behind the tree so he
could not be seen.” (M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using hog and hid (C). 
Spelling
For PA objective 1, use
finger cues to help children
discriminate middle (medial)
vowel sounds and same or
different beginning and ending
sounds.
For HFV objective 1, have
children read words for
spelling and reading to develop
word fluency.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from HFV
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 75
Planning
Reading
For LA objectives, choose
stories that include strong
adjectives and adverbs,
vivid verbs and phrases.
For LA objectives, use the
Attributes of Fine Literature
poster while teaching precise
language and insight.
Academic Day 14, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the action that happens in a narrative is called an event (plot) (C).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of The Three Billy Goats Gruff* by Paul Galdone
(C).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using The Three Billy Goats Gruff* and identify
an event in the story, e.g., “When the third and largest billy goat goes over the bridge,
the troll tries to stop him. The goat tosses the troll over the bridge, into the river, and
continues to the meadow.” (C).
4. Identify the characters and setting in narrative text structure using The Three Billy
Goats Gruff* (C).
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C).
2. Listen to excerpts of The Three Billy Goats Gruff*; explain how precise language
(word choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples, e.g., “The third billy goat gruff
was so heavy that the bridge creaked and groaned under him.” (C). 
3. Explain that what a main character says and does in a story helps the reader
understand that there are rewards and consequences for different behaviors (insight)
(M/CK). 
4. Listen to The Three Billy Goats Gruff* and identify examples of insight, e.g., “In the
Three Billy Goats Gruff, the troll is mean to two small billy goats. At the end of the
story, the third and largest billy goat teaches the troll that he can’t be mean to them.”
(M/CK/C). 
Tips
 76
Planning
Academic Day 15
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend sounds that have the same vowel sound and ending sound, e. g., did/hid/
bid; bug/hug (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2
on the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends below the base line, and a
horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5. Say/finger write/write phonogram u (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-
WRTR 15, 52). 
6. Read (say) phonograms o to i and u (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to i and u (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that a syllable is a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by
a single impulse of the voice; say name by syllable(s), e.g., Ja son, An na (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
2. Name vowels a, e, i, o, u and explain that every syllable must have a vowel (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
3. Identify vowels in words written on the board, e.g., bag/beg/big/bog/bug; had/hid/
hog/hug (M/CK/C). 
4. Explain that all other letters are consonants and identify consonants in words in
HFV objective 3 (M/CK/C: WRTR 59). 
5. Explain that vowels say their first sound in bag/beg/big/bog/bug; had/hid/hog/hug
because they are followed by a consonant (M/CK/C). 
6. Read words in HFV objective 3 for spelling and for reading (C).
Writing: The student will … ≈10 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that a bug is a small insect and hug means to hold fast
or tightly, e.g., “The little bug hid in the rug. My mother puts her arms around me
and hugs me.” (M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using bug and hug (C). 
Spelling
For SP objective 5, teach
phonogram u because all
vowels are needed to write
words.
For HFV objective 1, model
saying your last name, then
a few children’s names in
syllables, using both hands to
model syllables.
For HFV objectives 1-5
emphasize meaning of syllable,
vowel, and consonant to
prepare children for spelling
dictation.
For HFV objectives 2 and 4, use
Primary Rule Page 1 poster.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from HFV
objective 3 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
Tips
 77
Planning
Academic Day 15, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to teacher explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting,
and an event (plot) (M/CK).
2. Listen to teacher model narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 10 and
identify narrative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This
story is a narrative. The characters are Bess, mother, and Bess’s brothers. The setting
is one day in a tree. The event is that Bess gets stuck in a treetop.” (M/CK).
 78
Planning
Academic Day 16
Spelling: The student will … ≈55 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend selected previously introduced S/V words: me, do, and, go, at, on, a, it, is,
can, run, in, so, no, man, ten, tan, tin, ton (C).
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2
on the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends below the base line, and a
horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5 Say/finger write/write phonogram j (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-WRTR 15,
50). 
6. Read (say) phonograms o to j and u (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to j and u (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that a syllable is a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a
single impulse of the voice; say name(s) by syllable(s), e.g., Jen na, Dil lon (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
2. Name vowels a, e, i, o, u and explain that every syllable must have a vowel (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
3. Identify vowels/consonants in words written on the board, e.g., bag/beg/big/bog/
bug (M/CK/C). 
4. Explain that vowels in bag/beg/big/bog/bug say their first sound because they are
followed by a consonant; read bag/beg/big/bog/bug for spelling and for reading
(C: WRTR 225). 
5. Explain that vowels in go, a, so, no say their second sound because they are at the
end of a syllable (r. 4); read go, a, so, no for spelling and for reading (M/CK/C:
WRTR 221). 
6. Read selected rhyming words previously taught and explain why they rhyme (C).
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Compose oral sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of selected words from
PA objective 1, e.g., “Our boys run so fast they are sure to be in the race.” (C). 
Spelling
Continue to teach the first 26
phonograms (one per day) in
the order shown on WRTR 208-
211.
For HFV objectives, continue
to emphasize meanings of
syllable, vowel, and consonant
to prepare children for spelling
dictation (WRTR 59).
For HFV objective 5, introduce
rule 4 to prepare children for
spelling dictation.
For HFV objective 6, explain
that words rhyme when they
have the same middle and
ending sounds.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
Writing
For SCV objective 1, use
selected words from PA
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
Tips
 79
Planning
Academic Day 16, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈15 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C).
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 27 and identify narrative
elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This story is a narrative.
The characters are Joe and father. The setting is one day at a lake or pond. The event
is that Joe thinks he caught a fish, but it was an old inner tube.” (C).
3. Listen to teacher explain that narrative writing may be believable (realistic); cite
evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “The story we just read is believable. Joe
Kelly was sure he was going to catch a big fish the first day he went fishing with his
father. People go fishing, and there are times they might hook something other than
a fish.” (M/CK/C).
 80
Planning
Spelling
In PA objective 1, expand
phonemic awareness by
identifying vowel sounds in
previously introduced words.
For HFV objective 1, continue
to select several children’s
names to say in syllables.
In HFV objectives 1-6, continue
to emphasize meaning of
syllable, vowel, and consonant
to prepare children for spelling
dictation (WRTR 59).
For HFV objective 4, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective for reading
two ways.
Tips
Academic Day 17
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend bed, top, he, will, we, an, my, up, last, not, us, am (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2
on the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends below the base line, and a
horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5. Say/finger write/write phonogram k (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-
		 WRTR 15, 50).
6. Read (say) phonograms o to k and u (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to k and u (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that a syllable is a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a
single impulse of the voice; say name(s) by syllable(s), e.g., Lin da, To ny (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
2. Name vowels a, e, i, o, u and explain that every syllable must have a vowel (M/CK/C:
WRTR 59). 
3. Identify vowels/consonants in words (written on the board), e.g., had/hid/hog/hug
(C). 
4. Read selected previously introduced words (written on the board) for spelling and
for reading; identify those that rhyme and explain why they rhyme (C). 
5. Explain that vowels a, e, o, u are underlined at the end of a syllable to show they say
their second sound; read go, a, he (underlined on the board) (r. 4) (M/CK/C: WRTR
59). 
6. Explain why the vowel says its first sound in bed, top, will, an, up, last, not,
us, am, e.g., “The vowel in bed says its first sound because it is followed by a
consonant.” (M/CK/C). 
7. Explain that numbers are centered above phonograms that say sounds other than
the first sound; read do, is (written and numbered on the board); explain placement
of numbers (M/CK/C: WRTR 60).
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Compose oral sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of selected words from
PA objective 1, e.g., “He is the last boy in the line.” (C). 
Writing
For SCV objective 1, use
selected words from PA
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 81
Planning
Reading
For LA objectives, use the
Attributes of Fine Literature
poster while teaching
precise language.
For LA objective 2, choose a
story that includes strong
adjectives and adverbs,
vivid verbs and phrases.
Academic Day 17, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of Frederick* by Leo Lionni; explain the role of
each in telling the story (C).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using Frederick* and identify narrative elements;
cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This story is a narrative. The
characters are Frederick and his family of field mice. The setting is day and night just
before winter at the old stone wall in the meadow. One event in the story is that all
the field mice, except Frederick, are gathering grain and nuts for winter. Frederick is
spending his time dreaming and sunning himself.” (C).
4. Listen to teacher explain that narrative writing may be make-believe (fantasy); cite
evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “The story we just read is make-believe.
‘But Frederick said, ‘Oh no, I am gathering words. For the winter days are long and
many, and we’ll run out of things to say.’ Mice don’t talk.” (M/CK).
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C). 
2. Listen to excerpts of Frederick*; explain how precise language (word choice) adds
enjoyment and identify examples (C). 
Tips
 82
Planning
Academic Day 18
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend bag, beg, big, bog, bug (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2
on the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends below the base line, and a
horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
5. Say/finger write/write phonogram l (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-
		 WRTR 15, 51).
6. Read (say) phonograms o to l and u (C: OPR Step 1).
7. Say and write phonograms o to l and u (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that a syllable is a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a
single impulse of the voice; say name(s) by syllable(s) (C). 
2. Name vowels a, e, i, o, u and explain that every syllable must have a vowel (C).
3. Identify vowels/consonants in words written on the board, e.g., lad/led/log (C).
4. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading; explain
why some rhyme (C). 
5. Explain that vowels a, e, o, u are underlined at the end of a syllable to show they say
their second sound; read go, a, so, be, he (r. 4) (underlined on the board) (M/CK/C).
6. Explain that numbers are centered above phonograms that say sounds other than
the first sound; read do, is (numbered on the board); explain placement of numbers
(M/CK/C: WRTR 60).
Writing: The student will … ≈10 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that led means to lead as a leader and log means a
fallen tree, e.g., “Tom led the class to lunch. The man began cutting the log.”
(M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using led and log (C). 
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, continue
to select several children’s
names to say in syllables.
For HFV objective 4, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1 and others
for reading two ways.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from PA
objective 1 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 83
Planning
Academic Day 18, cont.
Reading: The student will ... ≈20 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C).
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 11 and identify narrative
elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This story is a narrative.
The characters are Debbie and grandfather. The setting is one day in the living room.
The event is that Debbie wants to comb her grandfather’s hair, but he doesn’t have
any.” (C).
3. Explain that narrative writing may be believable (realistic); cite evidence from text
to support thinking, e.g., “The story we just read is believable. ‘Grandfather, I can’t
comb your head. It’s empty!’ There are people who are bald and have no hair.” (C).
 84
Planning
Academic Day 19
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend he, we, my, will, us (C). 
Systematic Phonics with Finger Writing (SP)
1. Identify positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
2. Demonstrate correct directionality when finger writing a circle that begins at 2
on the clock, a short line, a tall line, a line that extends below the base line, and a
horizontal line (C: Clock Face Card).
3. Demonstrate a line that begins at the midpoint and slants to the base line in the
direction we write (M/CK/C: Clock Face Card-WRTR 42).
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card). 
5. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
6. Say/finger write/write phonogram m (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-WRTR 15,
51).
7. Read (say) phonograms o to m and u (C: OPR Step 1).
8. Say and write phonograms o to m and u (C: WPR Step 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that a syllable is a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a
single impulse of the voice; say name(s) by syllable(s) (C). 
2. Name vowels a, e, i, o, u and explain that every syllable must have a vowel (C). 
3. Explain that y may say /i/ at the end of a syllable (r. 5) and y, not i, is used at the
end of a word (r. 6); read my written on the board and explain the marking
(M/CK/C). 
4. Identify vowels/consonants in mad/mud and selected words previously taught, e. g.,
bad/bed/bid/bud; bag/beg/big/bog/bug; had/hid/hog/hug; lad/lid/log (C). 
5. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading (C);
explain why some rhyme (C). 
6. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate underlining vowels in go, a, so, be, he,
me (r. 4) (M/CK/C). 
7. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct placement of numbers in do, is
(M/CK/C). 
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that mud means soft, wet earth, e.g., “The big dog dug
a hole in the mud to hide his bone.” (M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using mud (C). 
Tips
Spelling
For SP objective 4 and HFV
objectives, review the concepts
of midpoint, syllable, vowel,
consonant, underlining of
vowels, and correct placement
of numbers (WRTR 59-60).
For HFV objective 1, continue
to select several children’s
names to say in syllables each
day.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
rules 5 and 6 (WRTR 221).
For HFV objective 3, print and
mark my on the board for
reading two ways.
For HFV objective 5, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1 for reading
two ways.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
selected words from HFV
objective 4 for oral sentence
practice as time permits.
 85
Planning
Academic Day 19, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of May I Bring a Friend?* by Beatrice Schenk De
Regniers (C).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using May I Bring a Friend?* and identify
narrative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This story is a
narrative. The characters are the author (the boy), King, Queen, and zoo animals.
The setting is a Sunday at the King and Queen’s house. One event is that the King
and Queen invite the author (boy) over for tea, and he asks to bring a friend.” (C).
4. Explain that narrative writing may be make-believe (fantasy); cite evidence from
text to support thinking (C).
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C).
2. Listen to excerpts of May I Bring a Friend?*; explain how precise language (word
choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples (C).
 86
Planning
Academic Day 20
Spelling: The student will … ≈50 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say/blend previously introduced words that are difficult (C).
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Explain the purpose for easy, legible, and neat handwriting (C).
2. Demonstrate correct sitting position and pencil grip (C).
3. Identify the positions on an analog clock (C: Clock Face Card).
4. Identify top and base lines and midpoint (C: Clock Face Card).
5. Explain general handwriting rules (C).
6. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct directionality when forming six
features on Spalding 5/8” lined paper (M/CK/C).
7. Say/finger write/write phonogram n (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-WRTR 15,
51).
8. Read (say) phonograms o to n and u (C: OPR Step 1).
9. Say/write phonograms a, c, d, f on Spalding 5/8” lined paper (C: WPR Step 1). 
10. Analyze/evaluate handwriting for beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading (C).
2. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate underlining vowels in go, a, so, be, he,
me (r. 4) (C).
3. Explain the purpose for and demonstrate correct placement of numbers in do, is
(C).
Writing: The student will … ≈5 minutes
Oral Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that a bag is a container for holding or carrying
something and big means large or great, e.g., “She put her snack in a bag.” (M/CK).
2. Compose oral sentences using bag and big (C). 
Spelling
For SP objective 9, increase
time for children to write
phonograms on paper and
evaluate their handwriting.
For SP objective 10, have
children focus on beginning at
2 on the clock. Model analyzing
and evaluating handwriting
based on the focus. Then have
children analyze and evaluate
their handwriting.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use
previously introduced words
for oral sentence practice as
time permits.
Tips
 87
Planning
Academic Day 20, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of Goodnight Moon* by Margaret Wise Brown
(C).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using Goodnight Moon* and identify narrative
elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C).
4. Explain that narrative writing may be make-believe (fantasy); cite evidence from
text to support thinking (C).
 88
Planning
Academic Week 5 ≈90 minutes/day
Spelling: The student will …		≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say spoken words ago, old, red, of, be, but, all, into, him, did by sound/syllable;
blend sounds/syllables into spoken words (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) phonograms p, r, t, v (phonogram introduction one/day) (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4-WRTR 51-52).
2. Read (say) sounds a – o, qu, s, u, p, r, t, v (20 of the 22)(C: OPR Step 1-
Days 1-4). 
3. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card Days 1-2).
4. Demonstrate correct directionality when writing six handwriting features on the
board, individual chalk board, or paper (C: Days 1-4: WRTR 42).
5. Read (say) and write phonograms a – o, qu, s, u, p, r, t, v on Spalding 5/8” lined
paper; analyze/evaluate handwriting for letters sitting on the baseline (15 of the 22)
(M/CK/C: WPR Step 1-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1 Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Explain the purpose for underlining vowels at the end of a syllable (r. 4) and
numbering phonograms; demonstrate correct underlining and numbering of
phonograms in words me, no, a, do, is, to (C).
3. Explain that we often use l, f, and s following a single vowel at the end of a syllable,
e.g., will, off, miss (r. 17) (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
4. Explain syllable division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for ago
(r. 4), will (r. 17), into, of, be (r. 4) (M/CK/C: Days1-5).
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development (SCV)
1. Explain that names of people are capitalized (r. 26); write name on personal work
M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
2. Explain that a declarative sentence (statement) tells one thought about what a
person, place, or thing does; identify the person or thing and the action in simple
oral sentences, e.g., “The man runs.” (man-person; runs-action) “The cat runs.”
(cat-thing; runs-action); (M/CK: Days 1-2). 
3. Compose oral declarative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of red,
all, old, but, e.g., “The red book fell. All the girls sing. The old man sings. The girls
sing, but the boys dance.” (C: Days 2-4). 
4. Explain that a noun names a person, place, or thing; orally identify nouns, e.g.,
person-teacher (Day 1), places-school, home (Days 2-3), things-book, pencil
(Days 3-4) (M/CK/C). 
Spelling
For PA objective 1, children
sound ago and into by syllables
rather than sounds.
For SP objective 2 (OPR),
select 20 phonograms children
have difficulty pronouncing.
For SP objective 5 (WPR),
select 15 phonograms children
have difficulty writing; have
them write single-letter
phonograms across the page to
practice spacing letters close
but not touching.
For SP objective 5, have
children focus on letters
sitting on the baseline. Model
analyzing and evaluating
handwriting based on the
focus. Then have children
analyze and evaluate their
handwriting.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark words on the board from
PA objective 1.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
rule 17 (WRTR 222).
Spelling, writing, and reading
days are suggestions.
Writing
For SCV and C objectives, the
language skills are in italics;
the week’s spelling words are
underlined.
For SCV objective 1, teach
or review the capital letters
needed for children to write
their first names.
For SCV objective 2, use the
procedure in Delivering.
For SCV objective 4, use the
Noun Categories poster.
Tips
Weeks 5 - 32: Weekly Integrated Language Arts Lesson Objectives
 89
Planning
Academic Week 5, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that a narrative tells a story and has characters, a setting, and an event
(plot) (C: Day 1).
2. Identify the author and illustrator of The Snowy Day* by Ezra Jack Keats; explain
the role of each in telling the story (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to narrative text structure using The Snowy Day* and identify narrative
elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
4. Explain that narrative writing may be believable (realistic); cite evidence from text
to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
Literary Appreciation (LA)
1. Explain that a character in a narrative is a person or an animal or object that takes
on the actions of a person, e.g., “An animal or object is a character if it talks or has
feelings like a person.” (C: Day 2). 
2. Compare and contrast experiences of two characters in Muncha, Muncha,
Muncha* by Candace Fleming (Mr. McGreely) and Click, Clack, Moo Cows That
Type* by Doreen Cronin (Farmer Brown), e.g., “Both characters have problems with
animals. Both Mr. McGreely and Farmer Brown get furious with the animals. Mr.
McGreely is upset because the bunnies keep eating the vegetables out of his garden.
Farmer Brown is upset because the cows and hens refuse to give any more milk and
eggs unless they get electric blankets to keep them warm.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-4). 
Reading
Teach text structure lesson at
the beginning of the week. Use
the rest of the week to teach
the literary appreciation lesson
on compare and contrast.
Tips
 90
Planning
Academic Week 6 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words six, by, had, must, hand, hill, let, land, cold, hot (C:
Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics and Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) phonograms w, x, y, z (M/CK/C: phonogram introduction-WRTR 52-53-
Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of phonograms 1-26 (C: OPR Step 1-Review 20 of the 26 daily-
Days 1-4).
3. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-2).
4. Demonstrate correct directionality when writing six handwriting features on the
board, individual white board, or paper (C: Days 1-4). 
5. Read (say) and write 15 of the 26 phonograms daily; analyze/evaluate handwriting
for tall letters beginning just below the top line and short letters that are half as high
as tall letters (M/CK/C: WPR Step 1-Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading (C:
Days 1-4). 
2. Explain that vowels i and o may say ī and ō if followed by two consonants, e.g.,
find, old (r. 19)(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
3. Explain pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for by (r. 5, 6), hill (r. 17),
cold (r. 19) (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Explain that names of people are capitalized (r. 26); write name on personal work
(M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
2. Explain that a declarative sentence (statement) 1) tells one thought about what
a person, place, or thing does, 2) begins with a capital letter to show where the
thought begins, and 3) ends with a period to show where the thought ends; identify
the attributes of simple sentences written on the board, e.g., “Six men run. A dog
jumps.” (M/CK: Days 1-2). 
3. Compose oral declarative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of six, by,
land, must, e.g., “We must do our work neatly.” (C: Days 1-4). 
4. Explain that a noun names a concept, that is something you cannot see or touch;
orally identify time, chance, today as concepts in oral sentences, e.g., “There is a
chance of rain today.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
5. Orally identify sections A – G nouns can, man, bed, time, chance, today, boy,
book, street, hand, ring, land as persons (Day 1), places (Day 2), things (Day 3),
and concepts (Day 4)(M/CK/C). 
6. Explain that an action verb shows motion and identify action verbs in oral
sentences, e. g., “Do your work. I go to school. I see you. I run to school.” (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4). 
Spelling
For SP objective 4, use
Letter Formation poster (see
Introduction).
For SP objective 5, have
children write single-letter
phonograms across the page
to practice spacing letters
close but not touching; use
Feature Formation poster (see
Introduction).
For SP objective 5, have
children focus on tall and
short letters. Model analyzing
and evaluating handwriting
based on the focus. Then have
children analyze and evaluate
their handwriting.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark words on the board from
PA objective 1.
For HFV objectives 2-3,
introduce rule 19 (WRTR
222); emphasize rules 5-6, 17,
and 19 to prepare for spelling
dictation.
Spelling, writing, and reading
days are suggestions.
Writing
For SCV objectives, the
language skills are in italics;
the week’s spelling words are
underlined.
For SCV objective 1, teach
or review the capital letters
needed for children to write
their first names.
For SCV objectives 4-5, print
selected examples of persons,
places, things, and concepts
(time, chance, today) on the
Noun Categories poster.
Tips
 91
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informatives
poster to reinforce the author’s
purpose and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use
informational picture books
to teach the names of the
informative elements.
One day focus on the
informative elements, and
the next day focus on how the
illustrations in that book help
the reader understand the text.
Academic Week 6, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
2. Identify title and author of Oranges* by Inez Snyder (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to teacher model informative text structure using Oranges*; identify author’s
purpose, topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g.,
“This is an informative, and the author’s purpose is to inform the reader about
oranges. The reader learns facts, such as oranges grow from seeds, the seeds grow into
orange trees, and at first the oranges are green.” (M/CK: Day 1). 
4. Listen to teacher model how to describe the relationship between the illustrations
and the text, Oranges,* e.g., “The author says that oranges start out as seeds, and the
oranges are green when they first start to grow on the trees. The illustrations help me
understand what the author is saying.” (M/CK: Day 2). 
5. Identify title and author of Apples* by Inez Snyder (C: Day 3).
6. Listen to informative text structure using Apples*; identify author’s purpose, topic,
and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 3). 
7. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Apples* (C:
Day 4). 
Tips
 92
Planning
Academic Week 7 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words hat, sit, sits, lot, box, yes, soft, stand, stands, tell
(C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics and Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of phonograms 1-26 (C: OPR Step 1-Review 20 of the 26 daily-
Days 1-4).
2. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-2).
3. Read (say) and write sounds of phonograms 15 of 26 daily; analyze/evaluate
handwriting for clock letters beginning at 2 on the clock (M/CK/C: WPR Step 1-
Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Read word groups written on the board and identify words that do and do not rhyme
and explain why, e.g., hat/sat/him; sit/hit/sun; lot/hot/hug; box/fox/bog (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4).
3. Explain pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for he (r. 4), by (r. 5, 6), sit,
sits, stands, stand, tell (r. 17), old (r.19) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Explain that names of people are capitalized (r. 26); write name on personal work
(M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
2. Explain that a declarative sentence (statement) 1) tells one thought about what a
person, place, or thing does, 2) begins with a capital letter to show where the thought
begins, and 3) ends with a period to show where the thought ends; identify the
attributes of declarative sentences written on the board, e.g., “A cat sits. A bug runs.”
(M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
3. Compose oral declarative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of lot, tell,
sit, stand, e.g., “The truck is in the parking lot.” (C:Days 1-4). 
4. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each lower case letter name (C:
Days 1-2). 
5. Identify nouns in PA objective 1 that name places-lot (Day 3), things-hat, box (Day
4), and action verbs-sit, sits, stand, stands, tell (Day 3) (M/CK/C). 
6. Listen to oral sentences; explain that a, an, the signal a noun is coming; explain
when to use a (use before a noun that begins with a consonant), e.g., “A hat is in
the box.” (Day 3), an (use before a word that begins with a vowel), e.g., “An apple is
red.” (Day 4), and the (use before a noun to show specific one/ones), e.g., “The dog is
big.”(Day 5) (M/CK/C). 
Spelling
For SP objective 3, have
children write single-letter
phonograms across the page to
practice spacing letters close
but not touching.
For SP objective 3, have
children focus on clock letters
beginning at 2 on the clock.
Model analyzing and evaluating
handwriting based on the
focus. Then have children
analyze and evaluate their
handwriting.
For weekly phonogram
assessments, see Assessing
Skills Mastery.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For HFV objective 3, emphasize
rules 4-6, 17, and 19 to prepare
for spelling dictation.
Spelling, writing, and reading
days are suggestions.
Writing
For SCV objectives, the
language skills are in italics;
the week’s spelling words are
underlined.
For SCV objective 1, teach
or review the capital letters
needed for children to write
their first names.
For SCV objective 5, continue
to add selected examples to the
Noun Categories poster.
For SCV objective 6, use the
sample dialogue for a, an,
the on WRTR 100. Adjectives
(called articles) a, an, the
signal a noun is coming.
Tips
 93
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informatives
poster to reinforce the author’s
purpose and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use
informational picture books
to teach the names of the
informative elements.
For TS objectives 1 and 4, focus
on the informative elements
one day, and the next day
focus on how the illustrations
in that book help the reader
understand the text.
Academic Week 7, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Identify title and author of Carrots* by Inez Snyder (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to informative text structure using Carrots*; identify author’s purpose,
topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This is
an informative, and the author’s purpose is to inform the reader about carrots.
The reader learns facts, such as carrots grow from seeds, the seeds grow under the
ground, and some farmers use machines to pick the carrots.” ( C: Day 1). 
4. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Carrots*
(C: Day 2). 
5. Identify title and author of The Farm* by Gail Saunders-Smith (C: Day 3).
6. Listen to informative text structure using The Farm*; identify author’s purpose,
topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 3). 
7. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, The Farm*
(C: Day 4). 
Tips
 94
Planning
Academic Week 8 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words she, see, the, now, ball, ask, just, get, call, to (C:
Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms sh, ee, th, ow (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-
Days 1-4). 
2. Read (say) sounds of sh, ee, th, ow, vowels, and 11 previously introduced
phonograms (C: OPR Steps 1-2-Days 1-4).
3. Identify consonant sounds in quit, cat, got (C: Days 1-2).
4. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-4).
5. Read (say) and write sh, ee, th, ow, vowels, and 6 previously introduced
phonograms; analyze/evaluate handwriting based on the day’s focus (C: WPR Step
2-Days 1-4). 
6. Read word groups and orally identify words that do and do not rhyme and explain
why: make/just/must; get/got/set; now/cow, cat (C: Days 1-3).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Explain pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for she (r. 4), ball (r. 17),
the (r. 4), see (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Identify and explain the attributes of a simple declarative sentence; compose oral
declarative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of she, call, get, now
(C: Days 1-4).
2. Look at the Spalding alphabet letter strips and say each upper case letter name
(C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain that action verbs show motion; identify see and get in oral sentences, e.g., “I
see a ball. I get a book.” (C: Days 1-2). 
4. Explain that a subject pronoun takes the place of a noun used as the subject of the
sentence (I, you, he, she, it, we, you, they); substitute subject pronouns for subject
nouns in oral sentences, e.g., “The boy is happy. He is happy.”; the word he takes the
place of boy (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
5. Explain that an adjective tells which one; add adjectives to oral sentences used in
objective 4, e.g., “I see a red ball. I get a good book.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5). 
Spelling
Have children write all
phonograms in columns after
multiletter phonograms have
been introduced.
For SP objective 5, set a
handwriting focus for
WPR based on children’s
needs. Model analyzing and
evaluating handwriting, and
then coach as children analyze
and evaluate their own.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For HFV objective 2, emphasize
rules 4 and 17 to prepare for
spelling dictation.
Writing
For SCV objectives 3-5, explain
that the pronoun I is always
capitalized.
For SCV objective 4, display
the Personal Pronouns
poster. Have children read the
singular and plural personal
pronouns listed in column 1.
Tips
 95
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informatives
poster to reinforce the author’s
purpose and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use
informational picture books
to teach the names of the
informative elements.
For TS objectives 1 and 4, focus
on the informative elements
one day, and the next day
focus on how the illustrations
in that book help the reader
understand the text.
Academic Week 8, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Identify title and author of Cranberries* by Inez Snyder (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to informative text structure using Cranberries*; identify author’s purpose,
topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking, e.g., “This is an
informative, and the author’s purpose is to inform the reader about cranberries. The
reader learns facts, such as cranberries grow on vines, they grow in bogs, and the
bogs are filled with water when it is harvest time.” ( C: Day 1). 
4. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Cranberries* (C:
Day 2). 
5. Identify title and author of Boat Book* by Gail Gibbons (C: Day 3). 
6. Listen to informative text structure using Boat Book*; identify author’s purpose,
topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 3). 
7. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Boat Book*
(C: Day 4). 
Tips
 96
Planning
Academic Week 9 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words you, good, this, your, out, look, book, street, three,
child (C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ou, oo, ch, ar (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-
Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of sh, ee, th, ow, ou, oo, ch, ar, vowels, and 7 previously
introduced phonograms (C: OPR Steps 1-2-Days 1-4).
3. Identify consonant sounds in quit, call, gym (C: Day 1).
4. Identify vowel sounds in at, end, big, on, us, me (r. 4), my (r. 5, 6) (M/CK/C:
Day 2).
5. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-4).
6. Read (say) and write sh, ee, th, ow, ou, oo, ch, ar, vowels, and 2 previously
introduced phonograms; analyze/evaluate handwriting based on the day’s focus (C:
WPR Step 2-Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading (C:
Days 1-4). 
2. Orally produce words that rhyme with hat, car, bug and explain why they rhyme (C:
Days 1-3). 
3. Explain that the letter g before e, i, or y may say /j/, e.g., gym (r. 3) (M/CK/C:
Days 1-2). 
4. Explain pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for me (r. 4), my (r. 5, 6),
call (r. 17), child (r. 19), you, your, look, book (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Explain that an interrogative sentence (question) 1) asks for information about
the subject, 2) begins with a capital letter to show where the thought begins, and 3)
ends with a question mark to show where the thought ends; identify attributes of an
interrogative sentence written on the board, e.g., “Is this your book?”
(M/CK: Days 1-5).
2. Compose oral interrogative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of your,
child, street, three, e.g., “What is your name?” (C: Days 1-2).
3. Compose oral interrogative sentences using question words who, what, where to
begin a sentence, e. g., “What is your name? Who is that boy? Where is Lisa?”
(M/CK/C: Days 3-4).
4. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 3-4). 
5. Explain that an adjective may 1) signal a noun (a, an, the), 2) tell which one (red,
big), 3) tell how many (ten, six); use adjectives in oral sentences, e.g., “The big man
runs. Six boys run.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-5).
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For SP objective 6, have
children write all phonograms
in columns after multi-letter
phonograms have been
introduced.
For HFV objective 2, example
rhyming words for hat: bat,
cat, fat, mat; for car: bar, far,
jar, star; for bug: dug, hug,
jug, rug.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
rule 3. Use Primary Rule Page
1 poster.
For HFV objectives 3-4,
emphasize rules 3-6, 17, and
19 to prepare for spelling
dictation.
Writing
For SCV objective 4, use the
Spalding Alphabet strips to
review letter names rather
than the phonogram cards.
Tips
 97
Planning
Academic Week 9, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Identify title and author of Tomatoes* by Inez Snyder (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to informative text structure using Tomatoes*; identify author’s purpose,
topic, and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
4. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Tomatoes* (C:
Day 2). 
5. Identify title and author of Trucks* by Byron Barton (C: Day 3). 
6. Listen to informative text structure using Trucks*; identify author’s purpose, topic,
and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 3). 
7. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Trucks*
(C: Day 4). 
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informatives
poster to reinforce the
author’s purpose and
informative elements.
For TS objectives, use
informational picture books
to teach the names of the
informative elements.
For TS objectives 1 and 4, focus
on the informative elements
one day, and the next day
focus on how the illustrations
in that book help the reader
understand the text.
Tips
 98
Planning
Writing
For SCV objective 3, use
the Personal Pronouns
poster, column 1 for help in
identifying singular pronouns.
For SCV objective 3, use the
Spalding Word Analysis CD to
identify parts of speech.
Academic Week 10 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words may, today, boy, say, play, cool, feed, green, oil, paint
(C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ay, ai, oy, oi (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days
1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of sh, th, ow, ay, ai, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, ar, vowels, and c, g, s, y
(C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4). 
3. Identify the positions on a clock, top and base lines, and midpoint (C: Clock Face
Card-Days 1-2).
4. Read (say) and write th, ow, ay, ai, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, ar, and vowels; analyze/
evaluate handwriting based on the day’s focus (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading (C:
Days 1-4). 
2. Identify beginning and ending and vowel sounds from PA objective 1 (C:
Days 2-3). 
3. Orally produce words that rhyme with may, ball, cold and explain why they rhyme
(C: Days 1-3). 
4. Define syllable as a single word or that part of a word that is pronounced by a single
impulse of the voice (C: Days 1-2).
5. Explain that we often use ay to say ā at the end of a base word, e.g., today, may (r.
18) (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
6. Explain syllable division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for today
(r. 18), may (r. 18), cool, oil, paint, tall (r. 17), gold (r. 19) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative and interrogative sentences that demonstrate usage and
meaning of may, say, today, green (M/CK/C: Days 1-5).
2. Compose oral interrogative sentences using question words when, why, how to
begin a sentence, e. g., “When is your birthday? Why is the little boy sad? How are you
today?” (M/CK/C: Days 2-4).
3. Identify nouns, action verbs, pronouns, and adjectives: today (n), boy (n), she
(p), say (v), he (p), play (n/v), feed (n/v), green (adj), oil (n/v), red (adj), good
(adj) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Explain that adding the suffix (ending) s to nouns means more than one person,
place, or thing; add s to bed, boy, top, street, hand (M/CK/C: Days 2-3).
5. Explain that an adverb adds to a verb by describing when the action happened;
identify adverbs in oral sentences, e.g., “The big man runs today. The big man runs
now.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4).
Spelling
For SP objective 4, have
children write all phonograms
in columns after multi-letter
phonograms have been
introduced. Have children
analyze/evaluate their
handwriting based on each
day’s focus.
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For HFV objectives 2-3 and 6,
continue to use Primary Rule
Page 1 poster Parts 1-2 to
reinforce consonants, vowels,
and rules 1-6.
For HFV objective 3, example
rhyming words for may: day,
say, pay, way; for ball: fall,
hall, tall, wall; for cold: fold,
gold, hold, sold.
For HFV objectives 5-6,
introduce rule 18; emphasize
rules 17, 18, and 19 to prepare
for spelling dictation.
Tips
 99
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives 1, 3, and 4,
focus on informative elements
and illustrations in the text
one day, and the rest of the
week focus on similarities and
differences.
For LA/F objective, use Sam
and Puff by Sarah Lapsley,
a Spalding narrative Series 1
leveled reader, that provides
practice of 26 phonograms
(alphabet) and 4 more: sh, ee,
th, ow. When reading pages 9
and 11, have children read Oh
no! as a phrase with emphasis
only on the word no.
Academic Week 10, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(C: Days 1-3). 
2. Identify title and author of Boats* by Byron Barton (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to informative text structure using Boats*; identify author’s purpose, topic,
and information; cite evidence from text to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
4. Describe the relationship between the illustrations and the text, Boats*
(C: Day 1). 
5. Identify basic similarities in and differences between Tomatoes* by Inez Snyder and
Cranberries* by Inez Snyder, e.g., “Both tomatoes and cranberries grow on vines.
Cranberry vines grow in bogs, but tomato vines grow in soil.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-4). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Sam and Puff (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per day
to develop fluent and expressive reading (M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 100
Planning
Academic Week 11 ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words over, mother, bird, earth, fur, pool, tooth, teeth, worm,
day (C: Days 1-3). 
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Explain that there are five spellings for the sound er; identify the five spellings in the
sentence Her first nurse works ear ly. (M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
2. Read (say) and write phonograms er, ir, ur, wor, ear (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-
Days 1-5).
3. Read (say) sounds of er, ir, ur, wor, ear, ay, ai, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, ar, vowels, and 2
others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-5).
4. Read (say) and write er, ir, ur, wor, ear, oy, oi, ou, oo, ch, and vowels; analyze/
evaluate handwriting based on the day’s focus (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-5). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Read selected previously introduced words for spelling and for reading
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Practice underlines, numbers, and brackets to prepare for dictation using me, do,
and, go, tooth, teeth (C: Days 4-5).
3. Explain syllable division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for over
(r. 4), mother, tooth, teeth, day (r. 18) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Explain that an exclamatory sentence 1) shows strong feeling, 2) begins with a
capital letter to show where the thought begins, and 3) ends with an exclamation
point to show where the thought ends; identify the attributes of an exclamatory
sentence written on the board, e.g., “It is hot outside!” ((M/CK: Days 1-5).
2. Compose oral exclamatory sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of tooth,
over, pool, day, e.g., “My tooth hurts!” (C: Days 1-3).
3. Identify nouns in PA objective 1 that name persons-mother (Day 3), places-earth,
pool (Day 3), things-bird, fur, tooth, teeth, worm (Day 4), and concept-day (Day 4)
(M/CK/C: Days 2-3). 
4. Explain that the suffix (ending) s is added to most nouns to form plurals; add s to
ring, bag, hat, bird, worm in oral sentences, e.g., “The birds eat worms.” (M/CK/C:
Days 3-4).
5. Explain that the suffix (ending) s is added to a verb when talking about one person,
place, or thing; compose oral sentences that use ring, play, paint, e.g. “The bell
rings. The boy plays. He paints pictures.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5).
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print and
mark S/V words on the board
from PA objective 1.
For HFV objectives, continue
to use Primary Rule Page 1
poster Parts 1-2 to reinforce
consonants, vowels, and rules
1-6.
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 3, continue
to print selected nouns under
persons, places, things,
or concepts on the Noun
Categories poster.
 101
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective 3, use A Trip
to the Park by Sarah Lapsley,
a Spalding narrative Series 1
leveled reader, that provides
practice of 26 phonograms,
multiletter phonograms
previously practiced, and ch,
ou, oo, ar.
Academic Week 11, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and elements of narrative writing (C: Day 1).
2. Identify author and illustrator of The Napping House* by Audrey Wood (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using The Napping House*; identify author’s
purpose and narrative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking; retell
story using specific details (C: Day 1).
4. Explain the author’s purpose and elements of informative writing (C: Day 2).
5. Identify author and illustrator of Planes* by Byron Barton (C: Day 2).
6. Listen to informative text structure using Planes*; identify author’s purpose and
informative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking; retell information
that supports the topic (C: Day 2).
7. Differentiate between narrative elements in The Napping House* and informative
elements in Planes* (M/CK/C: Day 3).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C: Day 4).
2. Listen to excerpts of The Napping House*; explain how precise language (word
choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples (C: Day 4).
3. Read A Trip to the Park (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per
day to develop fluent and expressive reading (M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 102
Planning
Academic Week 12 (Sections A-G: WRTR 254) ≈90 minutes a day
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Phonemic Awareness (PA)
1. Say and blend spoken words way, home, much, I, door, floor, low, send, school
(C: Days 1-3).
Systematic Phonics with Handwriting (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of phonograms 1-43 (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20 of the 43
that children have difficulty pronouncing-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Practice underlines, numbers, and brackets to prepare for dictation
(C: Days 1-4). 
2. Explain that the first job of the silent final e is to let the vowel say its second sound,
e.g., time (written on the board)(M/CK/C: Day 1). 
3. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in me–she on Spalding 5/8” lined paper
(M/CK/C: Days 1-2-five words/day). 
4. Read from the board me-she for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
5. Explain that a syllable ending in a vowel or vowel sound is an open syllable type, e.g.,
me, do, go, she (M/CK/C: Days 1-3-WRTR 225). 
6. Explain syllable type, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for me (r. 4,
open syllable), do (open syllable), go (r. 4, open syllable), is (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
7. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable type, markings, and/or rules for a (r. 4,
open syllable) is, she (r. 4, open syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5 one/two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, or exclamatory sentences that demonstrate
usage and meaning of way, low, send, much (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Compose oral interrogative sentences using question words when, why, how to
begin a sentence, e.g., “When is she going home? Why is the door open? How do you
get to school?” (M/CK/C: Days 2-3).
3. Explain that the suffix (ending) s is added to most nouns to form plurals; add s to
bug, hat, door; compose oral sentences that include bugs, hats, doors, e.g., “The
bugs are green. The hats are yellow. The doors are red.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1 and 3,
explain they are practicing to
write words in their notebooks
next week.
For HFV objective 2, introduce
silent final e (job 1).
For HFV objective 5, introduce
open syllable type.
For HFV objective 6, have
children practice analyzing 1
word each day.
For HFV objectives 6-7, have
them practice writing and
marking words on lined paper;
reinforce rule 4.
Continue to use Primary Rule
Page 1 poster Parts 1-2.
Writing
For SCV objective 3, use the
Noun Plurals Part 1 poster to
write selected regular noun
plurals in column 1.
Tips
 103
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective 5, use Ben
Visits the Farm by Sarah
Lapsley, a Spalding narrative
Series 1 leveled reader,
that provides practice of 26
phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and ay, ai, oy, oi.
Academic Week 12, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and elements of narrative writing (C: Day 1).
2. Identify author and illustrator of Llama, Llama Time to Share* by Anna Dewdney
(C: Day 1).
3. Listen to narrative text structure using Llama, Llama Time to Share*; identify
author’s purpose and narrative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking;
retell story using specific details (C: Day 1).
4. Explain the author’s purpose and elements of informative writing (C: Day 2).
5. Identify author and illustrator of Bats* by Lily Wood (C: Day 2).
6. Listen to informative text structure using Bats*; identify author’s purpose and
informative elements; cite evidence from text to support thinking; retell information
that supports the topic (C: Day 2).
7. Differentiate between narrative elements in Llama, Llama Time to Share* and
informative elements in Bats* (C: Day 3).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Explain that authors use precise language (word choice) to clearly describe people,
animals, places, and events (C: Day 4).
2. Listen to excerpts of Llama, Llama Time to Share*; explain how precise language
(word choice) adds enjoyment and identify examples (C: Day 4).
3. Explain that in many stories there are common experiences enjoyed by readers
everywhere (universality) (M/CK/C: Day 5).
4. Listen to excerpts of Llama, Llama Time to Share*; identify examples of
universality; explain why it is loved by readers everywhere; cite evidence to support
thinking, e.g., ‘“Llama Llama wasn’t sure she wanted to share, but after a little
encouragement from her mother, she discovered that sharing could be fun’. This is a
story enjoyed by children everywhere because they can all relate to the common trait
of sharing.” (M/CK/C: Day 5).
5. Read Ben Visits the Farm (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per
day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 104
Planning
Academic Week 13 (Sections A-G: WRTR 254-Begin S/V Notebook)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ng, ea, aw, au (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-
Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of ng, ea, aw, au, and 16 others that they have difficulty
pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write ng, ea, aw, au, and 11 others that they cannot say and write
automatically (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Practice underlines, numbers, and brackets to prepare for dictation (C: Days 1-2).
2. Explain that English words do not end in v or u (job 2); a silent final e is added, e.g.,
have, blue (written on the board) (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
3. Say (segment), write, mark, and blend sounds in me-she in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-2-five words/day). 
4. Read from the board me–she for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4). 
5. Explain syllable type, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for me (r. 4,
open syllable), do (open syllable), go (r. 4, open syllable), a (r. 4, open syllable), is,
she (r. 4, open syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
6. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable type, markings and/or rules for do (open
syllable), is, she (r. 4, open syllable) (C: Days 4-5 one/two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, or exclamatory sentences that demonstrate
usage and meaning of me, do, at, on, she, time (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that a linking verb shows a relationship between the subject noun and the
noun following the linking verb; say sentence patterns in unison using subject nouns
with am, is, are, e.g., “(teacher’s name) is a teacher. Jose (Maria) is a boy (girl). Bob
and Bill are boys. Sara and Amanda are girls.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-5). 
Spelling
For HFV objective 2, introduce
silent final e (job 2).
For HFV objective 3, children
begin writing in the notebook;
introduce only 10 words
so children can focus on
handwriting.
For HFV objective 4, ensure
that children read from the
teacher’s model on the board
until notebooks are checked
and corrected.
HFV objective 5 provides
practice analyzing 1 or 2 words
each day on the board.
HFV objective 6 checks
children’s ability to apply the
marking system in whole and
small group.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use your
name and children’s names;
have children repeat the
sentence patterns in unison
periodically using different
names to reinforce the concept
that linking verbs show a
relationship between the
subject noun and the noun
following the linking verb.
Tips
 105
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
example dialogue on WRTR
140-141 as your model for
demonstrating and explaining
informative-narrative text
structure.
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informative-
Narratives poster to reinforce
the author’s purpose and
narrative and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use McCall-
Crabbs Book A lessons
and picture books to teach
the names of informative-
narrative elements.
For LA/F objective, use Mother
Helps Tim by Sarah Lapsley,
a Spalding narrative Series 1
leveled reader, that provides
practice of 26 phonograms,
multiletter phonograms
previously practiced, and er,
ir, ur, wor, ear.
Academic Week 13, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the purpose for informative-narrative writing is to inform in an
interesting way. Explain that informative-narrative writing is a combination of
informative and narrative elements (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher model informative-narrative text structure using McCall-Crabbs
A 2; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements, e.g., “This
story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting
way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The characters are
the robin and her babies, the setting is one day in an old apple tree, and the event is
that Mother Robin is building a nest for her babies. The informative part gives facts
about the robin building the nest. She uses straw and mud to build the nest. Then
she lines it with soft grass. She makes the nest in a tree.” (M/CK: Day 1). 
3. Listen to informative-narrative text structure using White Rabbit’s Color Book*
by Alan Baker; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements,
e.g., “This story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in
an interesting way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The
character is the White Rabbit, and the setting is one day at White Rabbit’s house. One
event is that White Rabbit finds three tubs of paint and takes a dip in each color. The
informative part gives facts about the colors red, yellow, and blue. The reader also
learns that yellow and red make orange, red and blue make purple, and blue, yellow,
and red make brown.” (C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Mother Helps Tim (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per
day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 106
Planning
Academic Week 14 (Sections A-G: WRTR 254-255)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms or, ck, wh, ed (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-
Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) sounds of or, ck, wh, ed, and 16 others that they have difficulty
pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write or, ck, wh, ed, and 11 others that they cannot say and write
automatically (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that the third job of the silent final e is to let the c say /s/ and the g say /j/;
identify the job of e in chance, charge (written on the board) (M/CK/C-Days 1-2). 
2. Say (segment), write, mark, and blend sounds in can-top in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3- five words/day). 
3. Read can-top for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4). 
4. Explain that the phonogram or may say er when it follows w, e.g., work (r. 8)
(M/CK/C: WRTR 222-Days 1-2). 
5. Explain that a syllable ending in one or more consonants following a single vowel
or vowel sound is a closed syllable type, e.g., and, at, can, ten (M/CK/C: Days 1-3-
WRTR 225). 
6. Explain syllable types, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for can
(closed syllable), see (open syllable), the (r. 4, open syllable), so (r. 4, open syllable),
man (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
7. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for run
(closed syllable), no (r. 4, open syllable), now (open syllable), bed (closed syllable)
(C: Days 4-5-two/day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Explain that an imperative sentence 1) gives a command, 2) begins with a capital
letter, and 3) ends with a period to show where the thought ends; identify attributes
of imperative sentences written on the board, e.g., “Sit down. Stand up.” (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4).
2. Compose oral imperative sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of can
(noun), see (verb), run (verb), e.g., “Pick up the can. Look up and see the bird.
Run to the swings.”(M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain that a linking verb shows a relationship between the subject pronoun
and the adjective following the verb; identify linking verbs am, is, are in sentences
written on the board, e.g., “I am happy. You are happy. She (He/It) is happy. We are
happy. You are happy. They are happy.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-5-WRTR 112). 
4. Explain that the word and (conjunction) connects two nouns (M/CK/C: Days 3-4);
compose oral sentences that use and to connect two nouns, e.g., “Ann and Susie are
girls.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5).
5. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 4-5). 
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, introduce
silent final e (job 3); for HFV
objective 4, introduce r. 8.
For HFV objective 2, in Weeks
14-16, an average of 11-15
words are dictated each week
on Academic Days 1-3 (five
words/day).
For HFV objective 2, give a
daily quiz (Days 2-4) on words
entered the day before; give
a weekly quiz (Day 5) on all
words (can-top) for progress
monitoring.
For HFV objective 3, have
children read this week’s and
previous week’s words for
spelling and reading daily;
rotate reading across or down
columns in their notebooks
to reinforce automatic word
recognition.
For HFV objective 5, introduce
closed syllable type.
HFV objective 6 provides
practice in analyzing 1-2
words/day, and HFV objective
7 checks children’s ability to
apply the marking system;
emphasize rule 4 and open and
closed syllable types.
Writing
For SCV objective 3, have
children point to class
members as they periodically
repeat the sentence patterns
in unison to reinforce the
concept that linking verbs
show a relationship between
the subject pronoun and the
adjective following the linking
verb.
For SCV objective 5, use the
Spalding Alphabet strips to
review letter names rather
than the phonogram cards.
Tips
 107
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informative-
Narratives poster to reinforce
the author’s purpose and
narrative and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use McCall-
Crabbs Book A lessons
and picture books to teach
the names of informative-
narrative elements.
For LA/F objective, use Her
First Nurse Works Early by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
narrative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and er, ir, ur, wor,
ear.
For LA/F objective, begin
assessing oral reading
fluency using the Fluent and
Expressive Reading Checklist in
the Assessing section.
Academic Week 14, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the purpose for informative-narrative writing is to inform in an
interesting way. Explain that informative-narrative writing is a combination of
informative and narrative elements (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher model informative-narrative text structure using McCall-Crabbs
A 5; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements, e.g., “This
story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting
way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The characters
are Ethel and Mary, the setting is one day last spring, and the event is picking
Mayflowers. The informative part gives facts about Mayflowers. Mayflowers have
sweet-smelling pink and white blossoms, they sometimes hide under leaves and
grass, and they have very strong stems.” (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to informative-narrative text structure using I Love Trains* by Philemon
Sturges; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements, e.g., “This
story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting
way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The character is the
author (the boy telling the story), and the setting is outside his home during the day.
One event is that while the boy is standing outside, he sees and waves to his father
who is in the train’s caboose. The informative part gives facts about trains, such as
engines pull lots of cars, some cars carry trucks or grain, and the caboose is a place
for the train conductor to sleep.” (C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Her First Nurse Works Early (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 108
Planning
Academic Week 15 (Sections A-G: WRTR 255-256)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ew, ui (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 15 others that they have difficulty
pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 10 others that they cannot say and
write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that every syllable must have a vowel; identify the fourth job of the silent
final e in little (written on the board) (M/CK/C: Day 1). 
2. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in he-good in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
3. Read he-good for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
4. Say (segment), write, mark, and blend time, have, blue, chance, charge on 5/8”
lined paper (M/CK/C: Days 1-5). 
5. Explain syllable types, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for he
(r. 4, open syllable), you (open syllable), will (r. 17, closed syllable), my (r. 5, 6,
open syllable), good (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Day 1-4). 
6. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for will
(r. 17, closed syllable), we (r. 4, open syllable), my (r. 5, 6, open syllable), last
(closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5-two/day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences that
demonstrate usage and meaning of unfamiliar S/V words (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
2. Explain that adjectives 1) signal that a noun is coming (a, an, the-Day 2),
2) tell which one (tan, good-Day 3), 3) tell how many (ten-Day 4); compose oral
sentences that use a, an, the, tan, good, ten, e.g.,“I am a boy. I have an apple. The
boy sings. The desk is tan. The book is good. We have ten books.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-4).
3. Explain that the word and (conjunction) connects two verbs (M/CK/C: Days 3-4);
compose oral sentences that use and to connect two verbs, e.g., “Boys run and
play.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5).
4. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 3-4).
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, introduce
silent final e (job 4).
For HFV objective 2, give a
daily quiz (Days 2-4) on words
entered the day before; give
a weekly quiz (Day 5) on all
words (be-good) for progress
monitoring.
For HFV objective 4, before
teaching this objective,
show children the picture of
notebook page 3 on WRTR
231; then have them write the
words that illustrate the first
three jobs of e on a ½ sheet of
5/8” lined paper; explain they
are practicing to write silent
final e example words in their
notebooks for next week (Week
16).
For HFV objectives 2, 5, and
6, emphasize rules 4, 5, 6, 17,
and open and closed syllables;
objective 5 provides practice
in analyzing 1 or 2 words each
day, and objective 6 checks
children’s ability to apply the
marking system.
Writing
For SCV objective 1, choose 1
or 2 words to use in written
sentences on the board.
Tips
 109
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, use the
Elements of Informative-
Narratives poster to reinforce
the author’s purpose and
narrative and informative
elements.
For TS objectives, use McCall-
Crabbs Book A lessons
and picture books to teach
the names of informative-
narrative elements.
For modeling/coaching
comprehension assessment,
use Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for weeks 15-22; see
Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use The
Flying Fish by Sarah Lapsley,
a Spalding narrative Series 1
leveled reader, that provides
practice of 26 phonograms,
multiletter phonograms
previously practiced, and ng,
ea, aw, au, or.
For LA/F objective, continue
assessing oral reading
fluency using the Fluent and
Expressive Reading Checklist
in the Assessing section for the
rest of the year.
Academic Week 15, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Explain that the purpose for informative-narrative writing is to inform in an
interesting way. Explain that informative-narrative writing is a combination of
informative and narrative elements (M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher model informative-narrative text structure using A Busy Year*
by Leo Lionni; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements,
e.g., “This story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in
an interesting way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The
characters are Willie and Winnie (mouse twins) and Woody the tree. The setting
is the first day of January in the woods. One event is that Willie and Winnie make
friends with Woody the tree. The informative part gives information about how the
tree grows and changes throughout each month of the year.” (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to informative-narrative text structure using Brown Rabbit’s Shape Book*
by Alan Baker; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements,
e.g., “This story is an informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in
an interesting way. The narrative part has characters, a setting, and an event. The
character is the Brown Rabbit, and the setting is one day at Brown Rabbit’s house.
One event is that a package arrives for Brown Rabbit filled with all different shapes of
balloons. The informative part gives facts about different shapes, such as the square
box, the card shaped like a rectangle, and a tube with a circle shape top.” (C:
Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read The Flying Fish (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per day
to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 110
Planning
Academic Week 16 (Sections A-G: WRTR 257)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say)and write phonograms oa, gu (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 13 others that they have
difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write oa, gu ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 8 others that they cannot say
and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Explain that in the word are (written on the board) the silent final e has no job (job
5) (M/CK/C: Day 1). 
2. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in time-bad in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
3. Read time-bad for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
4. Explain that a syllable with a silent final e has one vowel followed by one or more
consonants and a silent final e (sfe syllable type); the single vowel usually says its
second sound, e.g., time, like, make (M/CK/C: Days 1-3-WRTR 225). 
5. Orally produce words that rhyme with book, can (C: Days 2-3). 
6. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for have (job 2, sfe syllable), time (job 1, sfe syllable), chance (job 3, sfe syllable),
little (job 4, closed syllable, sfe syllable), are (job 5, sfe syllable), ago (r. 4, open
syllable, open syllable), old (r. 19, closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
7. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for time (job 1, sfe syllable), blue (job 2, sfe syllable), charge (job 3, sfe syllable),
little (job 4, closed syllable, sfe syllable), are (job 5, sfe syllable), be (r. 4, open
syllable), bad (closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two/three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences that
demonstrate usage and meaning of unfamiliar S/V words (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that adjectives 1) signal nouns (a, an, the), 2) tell which one (little, old,
bad), 3) tell how many (ten); compose oral sentences that use a, an, the, little, old,
bad, ten, e.g., “The little cat will grow. I read an old book. Sally has a bad cold.”
(M/CK/C: Days 2-4).
3. Explain that an adverb adds to a verb by describing where the action happened;
identify adverbs that tell where in oral sentences, e.g., “Do your work now. Look
up.”; compose oral/written sentences that use adverbs now, up (M/CK/C: Days 3-4).
4. Explain that a compound word is made by the joining of two whole words; each
word has a meaning of its own, but when joined the meaning is changed; explain
why into, today are two syllables (compound word) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5).
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, introduce
silent final e (job 5).
For HFV objective 2, before
teaching this objective,
show children the picture of
notebook page 3 on WRTR 231;
then, have them turn to page 3
of their notebooks to write the
silent final e example words.
For HFV objective 2, give a
daily quiz (Days 2-4) on words
entered the day before; give
a weekly quiz (Day 5) on all
words (time-bad) for progress
monitoring.
Weeks 17-28 include 15 words
per week; dictate 5 words per
day three days a week.
For HFV objective 4, introduce
sfe syllable type.
For HFV objective 5, example
rhyming words for book: cook,
look, nook, took; for can: fan,
man, pan, plan, ran, tan,
van.
For HFV objectives 2, 6, and 7,
emphasize rules 4, 7 (silent
final e jobs 1-5), 19, and open,
closed, and sfe syllable types.
For HFV objectives, continue
to use Primary Rule Page 1
poster Parts 1-3 to reinforce
consonants, vowels, and rules
1-7.
Tips
 111
Planning
Reading
For modeling/coaching
comprehension assessment,
use Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for weeks 15-22; see
Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use
Grandma’s Helper by Sarah
Lapsley, a Spalding narrative
Series 1 leveled reader,
that provides practice of 26
phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and ck, wh, ed.
For LA/F objective, continue
assessing oral reading
fluency using the Fluent and
Expressive Reading Checklist
in the Assessing section for the
rest of the year.
Academic Week 16, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to informative-narrative text structure using My Friend Whale* by Simon
James; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements; retell
information that supports the topic (C: Day 1).
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 6; identify author’s purpose
and narrative elements; retell story using specific details (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Grandma’s Helper (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per
day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 112
Planning
Academic Week 17 (Sections A-G: WRTR 257-258)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ph, ough (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 11 others that they
have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 6 others that they
cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in red-look in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read red-look for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4). 
3. Explain that a base word is a unit of meaning that can stand alone, e.g., book
(M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
4. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for all (r. 17, closed syllable), time (job 1, sfe syllable), may (r. 18, open syllable),
into (closed syllable, open syllable), look (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
5. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for all (r. 17, closed syllable), time (job 1, sfe syllable), today (r. 18, open syllable,
open syllable) (C: Days 4-5 one/two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences that
demonstrate usage and meaning of compound words (into, today) and unfamiliar
S/V words (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
2. Explain that a helping verb helps form other verbs; read sentence patterns written
on the board that use helping verbs am, is, are with doing, going, willing, looking,
e.g., “I am doing my work. He is going home. We are willing to go. We are looking
good.” (M/CK/C: Days 1-2-WRTR 112-113).
3. Explain that the suffix (ending) ing means the action is happening now; explain
how to add the suffix ing to verbs that end in silent final e (r. 11); add ing to the base
words make, come; compose oral sentences using making, coming, e.g., “Mother is
making my bed. Jacob is coming for a visit.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
4. Explain that the suffix (ending) ing means the action is happening now; add ing to
the base words do, go, look; compose oral sentences using doing, going, looking,
e.g., “David is doing his homework. Alyssa is going home early. Mother is looking for
Michael.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1-2,
emphasize the uncommon
sound in of.
Continue daily/weekly
spelling quizzes for progress
monitoring.
For HFV objectives 1, 4, and 5,
emphasize rules 4, 7 (silent
final e job 1), 17, and 18, and
open, closed, and sfe syllable
types.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
base word.
For HFV objectives, continue
to use Primary Rule Page 1
poster Parts 1-3 to reinforce
consonants, vowels, and rules
1-7.
Writing
For SCV objective 1, explain
that a compound word is
made up of two words, and
each word has a meaning of
its own, but when joined the
meaning is changed.
For SVC objective 3, introduce
rule 11; use the Level 1 Word
Builder Cards for extra
practice of that rule.
For SCV objectives 3-4, have
children practice sentence
patterns using the subject
pronouns with the helping
verbs am, is, are and the ing
form of the verbs.
Tips
 113
Planning
Reading
For assessing comprehension,
use Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for weeks 15-22; see
Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use The
New Suit by Sarah Lapsley, a
Spalding narrative Series 1
leveled reader, that provides
practice of 26 phonograms,
multiletter phonograms
previously practiced, and ew,
ui, ck, wh, ed.
Academic Week 17, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to informative text structure using McCall-Crabbs A 29; identify author’s
purpose and informative elements; retell information that supports the topic
(C: Day 1).
2. Listen to narrative text structure using If You Give a Mouse a Cookie* by Laura
Joffe Numeroff; identify author’s purpose and narrative elements; retell story using
specific details (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read The New Suit (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages per day to
develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 114
Planning
Academic Week 18 (Sections A-G: WRTR 258-260)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms oe, ey (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of oe, ey, ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 9 others that
they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write oe, ey, ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 4 others that
they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in did-come in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read did-come for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for like (job
1, sfe syllable), book (closed syllable), by (r. 5, 6, open syllable), have (job 2, sfe
syllable), are (job 5, sfe syllable), say (r. 18, open syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for by (r. 5,
6, open syllable), must (closed syllable), make (job 1, sfe syllable), say (r. 18, open
syllable), come (job 5, sfe syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two/three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral declarative, interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences that
demonstrate usage and meaning of unfamiliar S/V words (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that the suffix (ending) ing means the action is happening now; read
sentence patterns written on the board that use helping verbs am, is, are with look,
say, e.g., “I am looking at the book. I am saying my words.” (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
3. Explain that the suffix ing means the action is happening now; explain how to add
the suffix ing to verbs that end in silent final e (r. 11); add ing to make, come.
Read sample sentences written on the board, e.g., “I am making a game. He is
coming now.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5). 
Writing
For SCV objectives 2-3,
continue to read sentence
patterns written on the
board that reinforce subject
pronouns with helping and
main verbs.
For SCV objective 3, use the
Level 1 Word Builder Cards for
extra practice of rule 11.
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, weeks 17-
28 dictation lesson objectives
include 15 words/week; dictate
5 words/day for three days a
week.
Continue daily/weekly
spelling quizzes for progress
monitoring.
For HFV objective 1, print over
on the Primary Rule Page 2
poster; emphasize rules 4, 5,
6, 7 (silent final e jobs 1, 2, 5),
and 18, and open, closed, and
sfe syllable types.
For HFV objectives, continue
to use Primary Rule Page 1
poster Parts 1-3 to reinforce
consonants, vowels, and rules
1-7.
 115
Planning
Reading
For assessing comprehension,
use Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book; see Assessing Skills
Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Horses by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and oa, gu.
Academic Week 18, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to informative-narrative text structure using I Love Bugs* by Philemon
Sturges; identify author’s purpose and narrative and informative elements; retell
information that supports the topic (C: Day 1).
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 9; identify author’s purpose
and narrative elements; retell story using specific details (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Horses (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 116
Planning
Academic Week 19 (Sections A-G: WRTR 260-261)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms igh, kn (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of igh, kn, oe, ey, ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 7
others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-
Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write igh, kn, oe, ey, ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed, and 2
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in hand-land in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read hand-land for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for live (job 1, sfe syllable), live (job 2, sfe syllable), hill (r. 17, closed syllable),
mother (closed syllable, closed syllable), three (open syllable) (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for late
(job 1, sfe syllable), hill (r. 17, closed syllable), three (open syllable), land (closed
syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two/day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral and written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of (live/
live) and other unfamiliar S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple
sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
2. Categorize (on the board) the words in HFV objective 1 by parts of speech, e.g.,
nouns: hand/ring/hill/bag/bog/bug/mother/land (C: Day 3); verbs: hand/ring/
live/let/beg/land C: Day 4); adjectives: live/late/big/three (C: Day 5); adverb: late (C:
Day 5). 
3. Explainthatthesuffixingmeanstheactionishappeningnow;explainhowtoaddthesuffix
ingto hand,ring,land;composeoralsentencesthatusehelpingverbs am,is,are withmain
verbshand,ring,land,e.g.,“Iamhandingyouthebooks.Weareringingthebell.Theplane
islanding.”(M/CK/C: Days3-4).
4. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 4-5).
Composition (C)
1. Explain that related sentences are about one topic; read related sentences written on
the board and explain why they are related; compose two related sentences (in whole
group) about a pet; illustrate them (M/CK/C: Days 4-5). 
Example Related Sentences:
“I have a pet cat. She is yellow.”
Writing
For SCV objective 1, words
that are spelled alike, but
have different pronunciations
and meanings are called
homographs, one type of
homonym.
For SCV objective 2, refer to
Noun Categories and Verb
posters to make abstract
concepts concrete.
For SCV objective 2, use
Spalding Word Analysis CD for
identifying parts of speech.
For C objective 1, introduce
related sentences with
procedure on Delivering 53;
use the example dialogue on
WRTR 117-118.
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
print mother on the Primary
Rule Page 2 poster; emphasize
rules 7 (silent final e jobs 1-2),
and 17, and open, closed, and
sfe syllable types.
Continue daily/weekly
spelling quizzes for progress
monitoring.
 117
Planning
Academic Week 19, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 14; identify author’s purpose
and narrative elements; retell story using specific details (C: Day 1).
2. Listen to informative text structure using Life in a Pond* by Allan Fowler; identify
author’s purpose and informative elements; retell information that supports the
topic (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Dogs (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day and individually to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Day 1-5). 
Reading
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Dogs by Sarah
Lapsley, a Spalding informative
Series 1 leveled reader,
that provides practice of 26
phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and ph, ough.
Tips
 118
Planning
Academic Week 20 (Sections A-G: WRTR 261-262)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms gn, wr (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of gn, wr, igh, kn, oe, ey, ph, ough, oa, gu, ew, ui, or, ck, wh,
ed, and 4 others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review
20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write gn, wr, igh, kn, oe, ey, ph, ough, gu, ew, ui, or, ck, wh, ed, or
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in cold-oil in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read cold-oil for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for cold (r.
19, closed syllable), ice (job 1, sfe syllable), play (r. 18, open syllable), bird (closed
syllable), earth (closed syllable), fur (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for child
(r. 19, closed syllable), ice (job 1, sfe syllable), play (r. 18, open syllable), green
(closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral and written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of (sea/
see) and other unfamiliar S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple
sentences, e.g., “The boat was on the sea. Can you see your dad?” (M/CK/C: Days
1-4). 
2. Categorize (on the board) the words in HFV objective 1 into nouns, verbs,
adjectives; cold (n/adj), hot (adj), hat (n), child (n), ice (n/v), play (n/v), sea (n/
adj), see (v), bird (n), cool (adj), earth (n), feed (n/v), fur (n), green (n/adj), oil
(n/v) (M/CK/C: Days 1-3).
3. Explain that the suffix s is added to most nouns to form plurals, but es is added when
a new syllable is formed (box es); add the suffix es to box; compose oral/written
sentences that use boxes, e.g., “Put the bugs in boxes.” (M/CK/C: Day 2). 
4. Explain that the suffix ed means the action happened in the past (regular past tense
verbs); add ed to look, land, play, cool, oil (r. 28); compose oral/written sentences
using the past tense of look, land, play, cool, oil, e.g., “ We played tag. The ice
cooled in the sun. Dad oiled the lock.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
5. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 3-4).
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print bird,
earth, fur on the Primary Rule
Page 2 poster; have children
read words for spelling and
reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 7 (silent final
e job 1) (er’s), 18, and 19, and
open, closed and sfe syllable
types.
Writing
For SCV objective 1, words that
sound alike but have different
meanings/spellings are called
homophones, one type of
homonym.
For SCV objective 2, use
Spalding Word Analysis CD for
identifying parts of speech.
For SCV objective 3, print boxes
on the second column of the
Noun Plurals poster.
For SCV objective 4, add
selected regular verbs (add ed)
to Verb Past Tense poster
Part 1.
Tips
 119
Planning
Reading
For TS objectives, have
children use the Spalding
Text Structure Cards to check
their understanding before
introducing the first three
mental actions next week.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Cows by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and oe, ey.
Academic Week 20, cont.
Composition (C)
1. Explain that related sentences are about one topic; read related sentences written
on the board and explain why they are related; compose related sentences about an
animal, illustrate them, and explain why they are related (M/CK/C: Days 2-5). 
Example Related Sentences:
“I saw a tiger at the zoo. He was loud!”
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to informative text structure using McCall-Crabbs A 1; identify author’s
purpose and informative elements; retell information that supports the topic
(C: Day 1). 
2. Listen to narrative text structure using McCall-Harby 8; identify author’s purpose
and narrative elements; retell story using specific details (C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Cows (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
Writing
For C objective 1, save model
related sentences for writing a
model informative-narrative
paragraph in Week 24.
 120
Planning
Academic Week 21 (Sections A-H: WRTR 262-263)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say)and write phonograms ie, dge (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2).
2. Read (say) sounds of ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, oe, ey, ph, ough, gu, ew, ui, or, ck,
wh, ed, and 3 others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and
2-review 20/day-Days 1-4).
3. Read (say) and write ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ph, ough, gu, ew, ui, ck, wh, ed,
or others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/
day-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in paint-floor in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read paint-floor for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4). 
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for tooth (closed syllable), worm (r. 8, closed syllable), day (r. 18, open syllable),
school (closed syllable), belong (r. 4, open syllable, closed syllable) (M/CK/C:
Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for teeth
(closed syllable), worm (r. 8, closed syllable), day (r. 18, open syllable) (C: Days 4-5
one/two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that noun plurals may be formed by 1) adding s, 2) adding es, 3) changing
the phonogram; add s to pool, worm, day, es to box, and change the phonogram
in tooth; compose oral/written sentences using the plurals of the following nouns:
worm, box, tooth, e.g.,“Worms like to crawl. Put the bugs in boxes. My teeth are
clean.” (C: Days 2-3). 
3. Explain that verbs show the action happened in the past by 1) adding the ending ed,
2) changing the phonogram, 3) changing the word; read the past tense of paint, do,
see, run, make, belong written on the poster; compose oral/written sentences that
use the past tense of paint, do, see, run, make, belong, e.g., “I painted a picture
yesterday. Jim did his work well. Ken saw his friend. Jan ran fast. Rob made a paper
airplane. The pencil belonged to Kris.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
Composition (C)
1. Listen to the teacher explain that an opinion tells what a person believes or thinks
about a subject or topic then gives a reason to support the opinion, e.g., (the topic
is a favorite sandwich) “My favorite sandwich is peanut butter and jelly (opinion)
because it is smooth and sweet (supporting reason).”; orally compose an opinion
about a favorite ice cream flavor (topic) (M/CK/C: Day 1).
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1-2, explain
the uncommon sound in door,
floor.
For HFV objective 1, print
worm on the Primary Rule
Page 2 poster; have children
read words printed on the
Primary Rule Page 2 poster for
spelling and reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 4, 8, 18, and
open and closed syllable types.
Give the first Spalding Spelling
Assessment List 1 as a pretest
(see Assessing).
Writing
For SCV objective 2, print
pools, worms on column 1 and
teeth on column 3 of the Noun
Plurals poster Part 1.
For SCV objective 3, print paint
and belong on column 1, saw,
ran, made on column 2, and
did on column 3 of the Verb
Past Tense poster.
Tips
 121
Planning
Reading
For MA objectives, use the
procedures and dialogues on
WRTR 142-144 and McCall-
Harby/McCall-Crabbs User’s
Guide 11-13, 23-28.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Sheep by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and igh, kn.
Academic Week 21, cont.
Composition (C) cont.
2. Listen to the teacher retell the story The Kissing Hand * by Audrey Penn
(C: Day 2). 
3. Listen to the teacher compose an opinion and give a supporting reason for a favorite
part in The Kissing Hand* (topic), e.g., “My favorite part of The Kissing Hand* by
Audrey Penn is when Chester’s mom shared a family secret with him because it made
him feel better when he had to go to school.”; orally compose an opinion and give a
supporting reason about a favorite part in The Kissing Hand (topic) (M/CK/C:
Day 2). 
		 Opinion = Sharing a family secret with Chester is the favorite part of the story.
Supporting reason = It made Chester feel better when he had to go to school.
4. Compose an opinion (in whole group) and give a supporting reason for a favorite
part in The Very Lazy Ladybug* by Isobel Finn (topic) using a sentence frame;
name the author and title of the book (C: Day 2). 
		 Example Response:
		 “My favorite part of The Very Lazy Ladybug by Isobel Finn is when the elephant
sneezed because it made the ladybug fly through the air. Opinion = The favorite
part is when the elephant sneezed. Supporting reason = It made the ladybug fly
through the air.”
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing
(M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher model first 3 mental actions using excerpts from Oranges* by
Inez Snyder (informative); identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (M/CK:
Day 1). 
3. Listen to excerpts from The Very Lazy Ladybug* by Isobel Finn (narrative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (M/CK/C:
Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Sheep (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Writing
For C objective 2, teacher
skims book to retell the story
The Kissing Hand by Audrey
Penn; then teacher turns pages
and coaches as children retell
the story of The Very Lazy
Ladybug.
For SCV objective 4, provide
a sentence frame in which
children fill in the opinion and
the supportive reason for that
opinion, then illustrate it.
Tips
 122
Planning
Academic Week 22 (Section H: WRTR 263-264)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say)and write phonograms ei, eigh (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-2). 
2. Read (say) sounds of ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ph, ough, ew, ui, and
others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-
Days 1-4). 
3. Read (say) and write ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ph, ough, ew, ui, and
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in yes-get in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read yes-get for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules for low
(open syllable), tell (r. 17, closed syllable), law (open syllable), way (r. 18, open
syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for bring
(closed syllable), ball (r. 17, closed syllable), way (r. 18, open syllable) (C: Days 4-5
one/two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that verbs show the action happened in the past by 1) adding the ending ed,
2) changing the phonogram, 3) changing the word; read the past tense of stand,
bring, tell, ask, get written on the poster; compose oral/written sentences that use
the past tense of stand, bring, tell, ask, get, e.g., “John stood quietly by the door.
Tommy brought his lunch to school. Hannah told her best friend a secret. I asked
the teacher for a new pencil. Sarah got a doll for her birthday.” (M/CK/C:
Days 3-5). 
Composition (C)
1. Explain that an opinion tells what a person believes or thinks about a subject or
topic; orally compose an opinion and give a reason for the opinion about a good
snack (topic), e.g., “I think an apple is a good snack because it is crunchy. My
opinion is that an apple is a good snack, and my reason is because it is crunchy.” (C:
Day 1).
2. Compose an opinion and give a reason to support the opinion for a favorite part in
the book Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type* by Doreen Cronin (C: Day 2). 
		 Example Response:
		 “My favorite part in the book Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Type by Doreen Cronin is
when the farmer didn’t get the typewriter back from the cows because the cows gave
it to the ducks so they could type.”
Writing
For SCV objective 2, add the
past tense form of spelling
words to the Verb Past Tense
poster: asked on column
1, stood, got on column 2,
brought, told, on column 3.
For C objective 2, have children
retell Click, Clack, Moo Cows
That Type as the teacher
turns the pages of the book.
Brainstorm favorite parts of
the book.
For C objective 2, provide
a sentence frame in which
children fill in the opinion and
reason for that opinion, then
illustrate it.
Tips
Spelling
Introduce only two new
phonograms and practice
the 2, 3, 4-letter phonograms
previously introduced.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 7 (silent final
e job 1), 17, and 18, and open
and closed syllable types.
Continue to use Primary Rule
Page 1 poster Parts 1-3 to
reinforce consonants, vowels,
and rules 1-7.
 123
Planning
Reading
For MA objectives, use the
procedures and dialogues on
WRTR 142-144 and McCall-
Harby/McCall-Crabbs User’s
Guide 11-13, 23-28.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Wild Cats
by Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and gn, wr.
Academic Week 22, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing
(M/CK/C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Click, Clack, Moo Cows That Moo* by Doreen
Cronin (narrative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring
comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to
support thinking (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from The Farm* by Gail Saunders-Smith
(informative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring
comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to
support thinking (C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Wild Cats (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
 124
Planning
Academic Week 23 (Section H: WRTR 264-265)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) and write phonograms ti, si, ci (M/CK/C: introduce one/day-Days 1-3). 
2. Read (say) sounds of ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ph, ough, ew, ui,
and others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/day-
Days 1-4). 
3. Read (say) and write ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ough, ew, ui, or
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4). 
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in home-one in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read home-one for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4). 
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for much (closed syllable), call (r. 17, closed syllable), love (job 2, sfe syllable), house
(job 5, sfe syllable), I (r. 5, open syllable), alone (r. 4, job 1, open syllable, sfe syllable)
(M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for call
(r. 17, closed syllable), then (closed syllable), love (job 2, sfe syllable), house (job 5,
sfe syllable), I (r. 5, open syllable), lone (job 1, sfe syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two/three
per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that to form the plural of a word that ends with a consonant and y, use i
instead of y and add the suffix (ending); in the word baby, use i instead of y and add
es, e.g., baby/babies (r. 24) (M/CK: Days 1-2). 
3. Categorize nouns, pronoun, verbs, adjectives, adverbs in HFV objective 1; home (n),
much (adj/adv), call (n/v), long (adj), love (n/v), then (adv), house (n), year (n), I
(pron), as (adv), send (v), alone (adj), lone (adj) one (n/adj) (M/CK/C:
Days 3-5). 
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use the
Level 1 Builder Cards for extra
practice of rule 24.
For SCV objective 3, use the
week’s spelling words to
introduce parts of speech
and then practice in each
successive section (see
Delivering 50 and Spalding
Word Analysis CD).
For SCV objective 3, add
selected regular and irregular
past tense verbs to the Verb
Past Tense poster (called,
loved, sent).
Tips
Spelling
All 70 phonograms have
been introduced. Continue
to practice the multiletter
phonograms that the children
have difficulty pronouncing
and writing automatically.
For HFV objectives 1-2, explain
that one is not phonetic, and
letter names are used when
spelling.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 4, 5, 7 (silent
final e jobs 1, 2, 5), 17, and
open, closed, and sfe syllable
types.
 125
Planning
Academic Week 23, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explainthatgoodlistenersandreadersusethefirst 3 mental actionsto1)check their
understanding (monitor comprehension),2)make connectionsbetweentheirprior
knowledgeandwhatisstatedinthetext,and3)predict typeofwriting(C:Days1-2).
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from My Friend Whale* by Simon James
(informative-narrative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label
monitoring comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite
evidence to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from The Snowy Day* by Ezra Jack Keats (narrative);
use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension,
making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C:
Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Birds (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day and individually to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Reading
For MA objectives, use the
procedures and dialogues on
WRTR 142-144 and McCall-
Harby/McCall-Crabbs User’s
Guide 11-13, 23-28.
For progress monitoring of
comprehension, continue
using Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for the rest of the year;
see Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Birds by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms (alphabet),
multiletter phonograms
previously practiced, and ie,
dge.
Tips
 126
Planning
Academic Week 24 (Section H: WRTR 265-266)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics(SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ough, gu, ew, ui,
and others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1-2-review 20/day-
Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ough, ew, ui, or
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in has-run in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read has-run for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain that words are usually divided between double consonants within a base
word. During spelling dictation, pronounce both consonants when reading for
spelling; read double consonant words in normal speech when reading for reading,
e.g., little, apple (r. 29) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5-WRTR 223). 
4. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for has (closed syllable), some (job 5, sfe syllable), them (closed syllable), other
(closed syllable, closed syllable), baby (r. 4, 6, open syllable, open syllable), well
(r. 17, closed syllable), for (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
5. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for some (job 5, sfe syllable), how (open syllable), her (closed syllable), well (r. 17,
closed syllable), about (r. 4, open syllable, closed syllable) (Days 4-5 two/three per
day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Form plurals of call, baby, man; compose oral/written sentences using plurals of
call, baby, man, e.g., “We had two calls today. The mother had twin babies. The
men are happy.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-3). 
3. Explain that the suffix ing means the action is happening now; say oral sentence
patterns that include subject pronouns, helping verbs am, is, are, and the ing form
of run, e.g., “I am running. You are running. He (She, It) is running. We are
running. You are running. They are running.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
Composition(C)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements for informative-narrative writing,
e.g., “The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting way. The informative-
narrative writing is a combination of informative and narrative elements
(characters, setting, event, topic, facts).” (C: Days 1-2). 
Writing
For SCV objective 2, add men
to the Change a Phonogram
column on the Noun Plurals
poster.
For SCV objective 3, add
selected regular and irregular
past tense verbs to the Verb
Past Tense poster (had, ran).
For C objectives 1 and 3, use
pronouns I, we, me, us, my,
mine, our. Kindergartners are
not expected to label pronouns
as 1st-person.
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print her
and other on the Primary Rule
Page 2 poster; have children
read words for spelling and
reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 4, and 5,
emphasize rules 4, 6, 7 (silent
final e job 5), 17, and open,
closed, and sfe syllable types.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
rule 29.
Continue to use Primary Rule
Page 1 poster to reinforce
consonants, vowels, and rules
1-7.
 127
Planning
Reading
For progress monitoring of
comprehension, continue
using Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for the rest of the year;
see Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Deer by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and ei, eigh.
Academic Week 24, cont.
Composition(C) cont.
2. Listen to the teacher explain that a paragraph contains three or more sentences
about a topic (M/CK: Day 1).
3. Identify attributes in a model informative-narrative paragraph written on the board
(characters, setting, event, topic, facts), e.g., “This paragraph is an informative-
narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting way. The narrative part
has characters, a setting, and an event. The characters are our class, the setting is
one day at the zoo, and the event is my class went to the zoo. The informative part
gives facts about the tiger. He is loud, and he has a big mouth and huge paws.”
(M/CK/C: Day 1). 
Model Example: 1st-Person Informative-Narrative
		 “One day my class went to the zoo. We saw a tiger. He had a big mouth and
huge paws. He was loud! His roar scared us. The zoo was awesome.”
4. Identify attributes in an informative-narrative paragraph written on the board
(characters, setting, event, topic, facts), e.g., “This paragraph is an informative-
narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform in an interesting way. The narrative
part has characters, a setting, and an event. The characters are my friend Mat and
me, the setting is one day at the park, and the event is Mat and I played at the park.
The informative part gives facts about the equipment at the park. The park had a
giant sand box, winding slides, and a bridge that moved.” (C: Day 2). 
Coach Example: 1st-Person Informative-Narrative
		 “One day my friend Mat and I played at the park near our house. We dug
tunnels in the giant sand box. We played on the bridge that moved back and forth.
We went down the winding slides. The park was so much fun.”
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explainthatgoodlistenersandreadersusethefirst 3 mental actionsto1)check their
understanding (monitor comprehension),2)make connectionsbetweentheirprior
knowledgeandwhatisstatedinthetext,and3)predict typeofwriting(C:Days1-2).
2. Listen to excerpts from Carrots* by Inez Snyder (informative); use the first 3 mental
actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making connections, and
making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to excerpts from The Napping House* by Audrey Wood (narrative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking
(C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Deer (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
Writing
For C objective 3, expand the
related sentences about an
animal (written on the board)
from Week 20.
 128
Planning
Academic Week 25 (Section H: WRTR 266-267)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonic (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, igh, kn, ey, ough, gu, ew, ui,
and others that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-review 20/
day-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write ti, si, ci, ei, eigh, ie, dge, gn, wr, kn, ey, ough, gu, ew, ui, or
others that they cannot say and write automatically (C: WPR Step 2-review 15/day-
Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in was-jump in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read was-jump for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Orally produce words that rhyme with brown, jump (C: Days 1-2). 
4. Explain that a word with consonant plus le syllable has one consonant followed by
le. The e is silent, e.g., little, apple (c+le)(M/CK/C: Days 1-4-WRTR 225). 
5. Explain that the phonogram ck may be used only after a single vowel that says ă, ĕ,
ĭ, ŏ, or ŭ, e.g., sick, block (r. 25) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5-WRTR 223). 
6. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for was (closed syllable), lay (r. 18, open syllable), apple (r. 29, job 4, closed syllable,
c+le syllable), ate (job 1, sfe syllable), author (open syllable, closed syllable),
brown (closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
7. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for that (closed syllable), lay (r. 18, open syllable), apple (r. 29, job 4, closed syllable,
c+le syllable), ate (job 1, sfe syllable), bread (closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two/three
per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Read the following regular and irregular past tense verbs written on the board:
lead/led, lay/laid, eat/ate (irregular past tense), jump/jumped (regular past
tense); compose oral/written sentences using the regular and irregular past tense
verbs, e.g., “Sara laid the toy on the table. The dog jumped over the fence.”(M/CK/C:
Days 2-3). 
3. Explain that an adverb adds to a verb by describing how the action happened;
identify adverbs in oral/written sentences, e.g., “Run fast. He writes well.” (M/CK/C:
Days 3-4).
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1, 4, 6, and
7, emphasize rules 7 (silent
final e jobs 1, 4), 18, 29, and
open, closed, and sfe syllable
types.
For HFV objective 3, suggested
rhyming words for brown:
clown, crown, down, frown,
gown, noun, town; suggested
rhyming words for jump:
bump, clump, dump, hump,
lump, pump, slump.
For HFV objective 4, introduce
the last syllable type
(consonant + le = c+le); see
WRTR 225.
For HFV objective 5, introduce
rule 25.
Give Spalding Spelling
Assessment List 2; see
Assessing.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, print
selected regular and irregular
verb past tenses on the Verb
Past Tense poster.
 129
Planning
Reading
For progress monitoring of
comprehension, continue
using Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension
book for the rest of the year;
see Assessing Skills Mastery.
For LA/F objective, use
Learning About Bears by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative Series 1 leveled
reader, that provides practice
of 26 phonograms, multiletter
phonograms previously
practiced, and ti, si, ci.
Academic Week 25, cont.
Composition(C)
1. Explain the attributes of an informative-narrative paragraph; in whole group,
construct an informative-narrative organizer (prewriting); orally compose a 1st-
person informative-narrative paragraph about a topic of class interest as the teacher
writes the paragraph on the board (M/CK/C: Days 3-4). 
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing
(C: Days 1-2). 
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Apples* by Inez Snyder (informative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking
(C: Day 1). 
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Muncha, Muncha, Muncha* by Candace
Fleming (narrative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring
comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to
support thinking (C: Day 2). 
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Learning About Bears (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4 pages
per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Writing
For C objective 1, coach as
children select a class topic,
use an organizer (prewriting)
for informative-narrative
elements, and orally compose
sentences in whole group to
be written on the board; use
pronouns I, we, me, us, my,
mine, our. Kindergartners are
not expected to label pronouns
as 1st-person.
For modeling/coaching
informative-narrative
paragraphs, choose topics
relating to science or social
studies.
Tips
 130
Planning
Academic Week 26 (Section H-I: WRTR 267-269)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C:
OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in sleep-feet in spelling/vocabulary notebook
(M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read sleep-feet for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for yellow (r. 29, closed syllable, open syllable), face (job 1, sfe syllable), miss
(r. 17, closed syllable), sick (r. 25, closed syllable), foot (closed syllable), feet (closed
syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for yellow (r. 29, closed syllable, open syllable), miss (r. 17, closed syllable), ride (job
1, sfe syllable), sick (r. 25, closed syllable), white (job 1, sfe syllable) (C: Days 4-5
two/three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Read the regular past tense verbs wash/washed, miss/missed and irregular past
tense verbs sleep/slept, ride/rode, get/got, spend/spent written on the board;
compose oral/written sentences that use the regular and irregular past tense of sleep,
wash, miss, ride, get, spend, e.g., “They slept in the tent. I washed my hands before
lunch. Jenny rode her bike in the park. I spent all of my money.” (C: Days 1-3). 
3. Explain that the phonogram ed has three sounds and is used to form the past tense
of verbs. If the verb ends in the sound /d/ or /t/, adding ed makes another syllable
that says /ed/, e.g., landed, planted; if the verb ends in an unvoiced consonant,
the ed says /t/, e.g., looked, jumped. In all other verbs the ending ed says /d/, e.g.,
played, belonged (r. 28) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5-WRTR 223). 
4. Explain that a phrase is a group of words; explain that a preposition is placed before
a noun or pronoun to show it relates to some other words in the sentence; read
sentence patterns written on the board that use at, on, in, up, of, out, into, by, over,
to as prepositions, e.g., “I am in school. You are in school.”, then “I am at school.
You are at school.”, then “I go to school. You go to school.” (C: Days 2-4). 
Composition (C)
1. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of informative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to provide information. The informative elements are topic (what
the paragraph is about) and information (facts about a person, place, or thing).”
(C: Days 2-3).
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 7 (silent final
e job 1), 17, 29, 25, and open,
closed, and sfe syllable types.
Writing
For SCV objective 2, add
selected regular and irregular
past tense verbs to the Verb
Past Tense poster.
For SVC objective 3, introduce
rule 28.
For SVC objective 4, introduce
a phrase and preposition.
 131
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective, use
Touring the Public Library
by Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative-narrative Series
1 leveled reader, that provides
practice of phonograms
previously introduced.
Academic Week 26, cont.
2. Listen to the teacher identify attributes in a model informative (expository)
paragraph written on the board, e.g., “The author’s purpose is to inform. The topic
is bees, and the informative part gives facts about the bees. Bees live in boxes called
hives, the bees make honey in the hives, and the beekeeper collects the honey.”
(M/CK/C: Day 2). 
Model Example: 3rd-Person Informative Paragraph
			 Bees are raised by a person called a beekeeper. Bees live in boxes called hives.
The bees make honey inside the hives. Then, the honey is collected by the beekeeper
so it can be eaten.
3. Identify attributes in an informative (expository) paragraph written on the board,
e.g., “The author’s purpose is to inform. The topic is honeybees. The informative part
gives facts about bees. They are insects, they have five eyes, six legs, and two pairs of
wings. Pollen is carried on their hind legs to the hive to make honey.”
(C: Day 3). 
Coach Example: 3rd-Person Informative Paragraph
			 Honey bees are insects. They have five eyes, six legs, and two pairs of wings.
They carry pollen on their hind legs to the hive to make honey. Bees have been
around for many years.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing
(C: Days 1-2).
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Tomatoes* by Inez Snyder (informative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from The Three Billy Goats Gruff* by Paul Galdone
(narrative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring
comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to
support thinking (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Touring the Public Library (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days 1-5). 
Tips
Writing
For C objective 2, model an
informative paragraph on the
board; use pronouns he, she,
it, they, them, him, her, its,
their, them. Kindergartners
are not expected to label
pronouns as 3rd-person.
For C objectives, for modeling/
coaching informative
paragraphs, choose topics
relating to science or social
studies.
 132
Planning
Academic Week 27 (Section I: WRTR 269-270)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C:
OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in blows-free in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3).
2. Read blows-free for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for blow (open syllable), block (r. 25, closed syllable), river (closed syllable, closed
syllable), planted (r. 28, closed syllable, closed syllable), sung (closed syllable),
winter (closed syllable, closed syllable), stone (job 1, sfe syllable)
(M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types, markings, and/or rules for blows
(closed syllable), block (r. 25, closed syllable), sing (closed syllable), free (open
syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 1-2).
3. Read regular and irregular past tense verbs blow/blew, plant/planted, cut/cut,
sing/sang written on the board; compose oral/written sentences that use the regular
and irregular past tense verbs, e.g., “He planted a corn seed. The class sang a song.”
(C: Days 2-3). 
4. Explain that words that are the names or titles of people, places, books, days, or
months are capitalized, e.g., Mary, Sunday, May (r. 26); compose oral/written
sentences using Mary, Sunday, May, e.g., “Her name is Mary. We do not go to school
on Sunday. School ends in May.” (M/CK/C: Days 3-4-WRTR 223). 
5. Explain that a phrase is a group of words; explain that a preposition is placed before
a noun or pronoun to show it relates to some other words in the sentence; identify
the prepositional phrases in sentences written on the board, e.g., “The men ride in
the car. I live in a free land.” (C: Days 3-5).
Tips
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print river
and winter on the Primary
Rule Page 2 poster; have
children read for spelling and
reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and
4, emphasize rules 7 (silent
final e job 1), 25, 28, and open,
closed, and sfe syllable types.
Writing
For SCV objective 3, add
selected regular and irregular
past tense verbs to the Verb
Past Tense poster.
For SCV objective 4, introduce
rule 26.
 133
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective, use A
Visit to the County Fair by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative-narrative Series
1 leveled reader, that provides
practice of phonograms
previously introduced.
Academic Week 27, cont.
Compostion(C)
1. Identify attributes in an informative (expository) paragraph written on the board,
e.g., “The author’s purpose is to inform. The topic is vegetables. The informative part
gives facts about vegetables. They are plants. They come in many colors. Their roots,
stems, leaves, seeds, or flowers can be eaten as food. Some grow above ground and
some grow underground. They may be eaten raw or cooked.” (C: Day 2). 
Coach Example: 3rd-Person Informative Paragraph
Vegetables are plants. They come in many colors. Their roots, stems, leaves, seeds,
or flowers can be eaten as food. Some vegetables like lettuce grow above the ground,
but some like onions and carrots grow underground. Vegetables may be eaten raw or
cooked.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing
(C: Days 1-2).
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from I Love Trains* by Philemon Sturges
(informative-narrative); use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label
monitoring comprehension, making connections, and making predictions; cite
evidence to support thinking (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Frederick* by Leo Lionni (narrative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read A Visit to the County Fair (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days1-5). 
Tips
Writing
For C objective 1, coach an
informative paragraph on the
board; use pronouns he, she,
it, they, them, him, her, its,
their, them. Kindergartners
are not expected to label
pronouns as 3rd-person.
For C objectives, for modeling/
coaching informative
paragraphs, choose topics
relating to science or social
studies.
 134
Planning
Academic Week 28 (Section I: WRTR 270-271)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C:
OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in lake-Sunday in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read lake-Sunday for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for lake (job 1, sfe syllable), lace (job 1, sfe syllable), fall (r. 17, closed syllable),
back (r. 25, closed syllable), away (r. 4, 18, open syllable, open syllable), paper
(r. 4, open syllable, closed syllable), each (closed syllable), Sunday (r. 26, 18, closed
syllable, open syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for page (job 1, sfe syllable), nice (job 1, sfe syllable), fall (r. 17, closed syllable),
back (r. 25, closed syllable), paper (r. 4, open syllable, closed syllable), Sunday
(r. 26, 18, closed syllable, open syllable) (C: Days 4-5 three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose oral/written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
S/V words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Say names of upper and lower case alphabet letters (C: Days 1-2).
3. Explain that the suffix ing means the action is happening now; say sentence
patterns that include subject pronouns, helping verbs am, is, are, and the ing form
of main verbs fall, put, e.g., “I am falling. You are falling. He (She/It) is falling.”
“I am putting on my hat. You are putting on your hat. He (She) is putting on his
(her) hat.” (M/CK/C: Days 2-3).
4. Explain that names or titles of people, places, books, days, or months are capitalized,
e.g., Monday, Mr. (r. 26) (M/CK/C: Days 3-4).
5. Categorize words in HFV objective 1 into nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, and
adverbs; lake (n), lace (n/v/adj), page (n/v), nice (adj), end (n/v), fall (n/v/adj),
went (v), back (n/v/adj), away (adv), paper (n/v/adj), put (v), each (pron/adj/
adv), soon (adv), came (v), Sunday (n) (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
Composition(C)
1. Explain the attributes of an informative paragraph; in whole group, construct an
informative organizer; orally compose a four-five sentence informative (expository)
paragraph about a topic of class interest as the teacher writes the paragraph on the
board (C: Days 4-5). 
Spelling
For HFV objective 1, print
paper on the Primary Rule
Page 2 poster; have children
read for spelling and reading;
explain that Sunday begins
with a capital letter because
it names a day of the week (r.
26).
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 4, 7 (silent
final e job 1), 17, 18, 25, 26,
and open, closed, and sfe
syllable types.
Writing
For SCV objective 5, add
selected regular and irregular
past tense verbs to the Verb
Past Tense poster.
For SCV objective 5, use the
Spalding Word Analysis CD to
identify parts of speech.
For C objective 1, compose an
informative paragraph on the
board; use pronouns he, she,
it(s), they, them, him, her,
their. Kindergartners are not
expected to label pronouns as
3rd-person.
For C objective 1, for modeling/
coaching informative
paragraphs, choose topics
relating to science or social
studies.
Tips
 135
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective, use A
Tour of the Fire Station by
Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative-narrative Series
1 leveled reader, that provides
practice of phonograms
previously introduced.
Academic Week 28, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Comprehension (First 3 mental actions) (MA)
1. Explain that good listeners and readers use the first 3 mental actions to 1) check
their understanding (monitor comprehension), 2) make connections between
their prior knowledge and what is stated in the text, and 3) predict type of writing (C:
Days 1-2).
2. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Bats* by Lily Wood (informative); use the
first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension, making
connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C: Day 1).
3. Listen to teacher read excerpts from Life in a Pond* by Allan Fowler (informative);
use the first 3 mental actions to identify and label monitoring comprehension,
making connections, and making predictions; cite evidence to support thinking (C:
Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read A Tour of the Fire Station (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day and individually to develop fluent and expressive reading (C: Days
1-5). 
Tips
 136
Planning
Academic Week 29 (Section I: WRTR 271-272)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR
Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in show-after in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read show-after for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for Monday (r. 26, 18, closed syllable, open syllable), find (r. 19, closed syllable),
give (job 2, sfe syllable), letter (r. 29, closed syllable, closed syllable), Mr. (r. 26,
closed syllable)(M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for Monday (r. 26, 18, closed syllable, open syllable), find (r. 19, closed syllable),
give (job 2, sfe syllable), letter (r. 25, closed syllable, closed syllable), Mr. (r. 26,
closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two /three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar S/V
words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain four ways to form noun plurals; categorize the plurals of foot, river, song,
letter, moon, baby, box; compose written sentences using the plural of letter, e.g.,
“Give the letters to Mr. White.” (M/CK/C: Days 4-5). 
Composition(C)
1. Compose sentences that identify a similarity (how something is alike) and a
difference (how something is different) between cows and horses using Learning
About Cows and Learning About Horses (Spalding Series I Leveled Readers) using a
sentence frame (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
Example Similarity:
“Cows and horses are alike because a group of cows or horses is called a herd.”
Example Difference:
“Cows are different than horses because cows move slowly, but horses can trot and
jump.”
2. Explain the author’s purpose and the elements of narrative writing, e.g., “The
author’s purpose is to entertain and develop an understanding about people and the
world. A narrative has characters (people or animals that take on the actions of a
person), a setting (the time and place where the story happened), and an event (the
action that happens in the story).” (C: Days 1-2).
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, add
selected noun plurals to the
Noun Plurals poster.
For C objective 1, provide
sentence frames in which
children can fill in a similarity
and a difference.
Spelling
NOTE: Section I words are
challenge for kindergarten so
only 11 words are dictated in
weeks 29-32.
For HFV objective 1, use the
dialogue for Mr. given on
WRTR 272; print letter and
after on the Primary Rule
Page 1 poster; have children
read for spelling and reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 7 (silent final
e jobs 1, 2) 18, 19, 26, 29, and
open, closed, and sfe syllable
types.
Give Spalding Spelling
Assessment List 3; see
Assessing.
 137
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective 1, use A
Trip to the Animal Shelter
by Sarah Lapsley, a Spalding
informative-narrative Series
1 leveled reader, that provides
practice of phonograms
previously introduced.
For LA/F objective 2, the
asterisk beside Ears Hear
means use an available poem
that has good examples
of words and phrases that
suggest feelings or appeals to
the senses. Ears Hear can be
found in the 20th Century
Children’s Poetry Treasury.
Academic Week 29, cont.
Composition(C) cont.
3. Listen to teacher identify the attributes in a model 1st-person narrative paragraph
written on the board, e.g., “The author’s purpose is to entertain and develop an
understanding about people and the world. The characters are my family, my sister,
and myself. The setting is in the woods during the summer. The event is my sister and
I find rocks while camping.” (M/CK: Day 1). 
Model Example: 1st-Person Narrative Paragraph
My family likes to go camping in the woods during the summer. My sister and I
look for pretty rocks to take home. We have a large box to keep them in. Sometimes
we take some of the rocks to school to show our friends. I hope we go camping again
soon.
4. Identify attributes in a four-five sentence 1st-person narrative paragraph written on
the board, e.g., “The author’s purpose is to entertain and develop an understanding
about people and the world. The character is myself. The setting is outside at night.
The event is Barney was sprayed by a skunk.” (C: Day 2). 
Coach Example: 1st-Person Narrative Paragraph
Have you ever met a skunk? My dog, Barney, did. Barney was outside at night
when he was sprayed by a skunk. We had to give him many baths because of the bad
smell. It took a long time before we could play with Barney. I do not think Barney
will chase any more skunks.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Use an organizer to identify similarities in and differences between cows and horses
using Learning About Cows and Learning About Horses (Spalding Series 1 Leveled
Readers) (M/CK/C: Days 1-2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read A Trip to the Animal Shelter (Spalding Series 1 Leveled Reader) in unison 3-4
pages per day and individually to develop fluent and expressive reading (C:
Days 1-5). 
2. Listen to teacher read the poem Ears Hear* by Lucia M. and James L. Hymes Jr.;
identify words and phrases that suggest feelings or appeal to the senses (M/CK/C:
Days 3-4). 
Tips
Writing
For C objectives 3-4, model/
coach 1st-person narrative
paragraphs on the board; use
pronouns I, we, me, us, my,
mine, our. Kindergartners
are not expected to label
pronouns as 1st-person.
 138
Planning
Academic Week 30 (Section I: WRTR 272-273)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C: OPR
Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in thing-dear in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read thing-dear for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for thing (closed syllable), its (closed syllable), his (closed syllable), her (closed
syllable), it’s (closed syllable), very (r. 6, closed syllable, open syllable), thank
(closed syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or
rules for what (closed syllable), than (closed syllable), it’s (closed syllable), very
(r. 6, closed syllable, open syllable), dear (closed syllable) (C: Days 4-5
two/three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar S/V
words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that an apostrophe is used to show that two words are combined; read it is =
it’s (written on the board); compose oral sentences that use the contraction it’s, e.g.,
“It’s hot today. It’s cold today.” (M/CK/C: Days 1-2).
Composition(C)
1. Compose sentences that identify a similarity in and a difference between bears and
deer using Learning About Bears and Learning About Deer (Spalding Series I
Leveled Readers) using a sentence frame (M/CK/C: Days 3-5). 
Example Similarity:
“Bears and deer are alike because both are mammals.”
Example Difference:
“Bears and deer are different because a baby deer is called a fawn, but a baby bear is
called a cub.”
2. Explain the attributes of a narrative paragraph; in whole group, construct a
narrative organizer; orally compose a four-five sentence 1st-person narrative
paragraph about a topic of class interest as the teacher writes the paragraph on the
board (C: Day 4). 
Tips
Spelling
NOTE: Section I words are
challenge for kindergarten so
only 11 words are dictated this
week.
For HFV objective 1, use the
Instructional Tip on WRTR
272 to explain use of the
apostrophe in it’s.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rule 6 and open and
closed syllable types.
Writing
For C objective 1, provide
sentence frames in which
children fill in a similarity and
a difference.
For C objective 2, coach a 1st-
person narrative paragraph
on the board; use pronouns
I, we, me, us, my, mine,
our. Kindergartners are not
expected to label pronouns as
1st-person.
 139
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective 2, the
asterisk beside Mice means use
an available poem that has
good examples of words and
phrases that suggest feelings or
appeals to the senses. Mice can
be found in the Bill Martin Jr.
Big Book of Poetry.
Academic Week 30, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Use an organizer to identify similarities in and differences between bears and deer
using Learning About Bears and Learning About Deer (Spalding Series 1 Leveled
Readers) (M/CK/C: Days 1-2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Go, Dog, Go* by P. D. Eastman in unison 8-10 pages per day and individually
to develop fluent and expressive reading; retell story including key details (C: Days
1-5).
2. Listen to teacher read the poem Mice* by Rose Fyleman; identify words and phrases
that suggest feelings or appeal to the senses (C: Days 3-4). 
Tips
 140
Planning
Academic Week 31 (Section I: WRTR 273)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing (C:
OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in west-corn in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read west-corn for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain that words beginning with the sound /z/ are always spelled with z, never s,
e.g., zoo, zip, zero (r. 27) (M/CK/C: Days 4-5-WRTR 223). 
4. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for sold (r. 19, closed syllable), far (closed syllable), alike (r. 4, job 1, open syllable,
sfe syllable), brave (job 1, sfe syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
5. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for told (r. 19, closed syllable), form (closed syllable), gave (job 1, sfe syllable), alike
(r. 4, job 1, open syllable, sfe syllable) (C: Days 4-5 two per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar S/V
words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (M/CK/C: Days 1-4).
2. Explain that an object pronoun takes the place of a noun used as the object of a
preposition or verb; substitute object pronouns for object nouns in written sentences,
e.g., “Give the book to me.”; read sentence patterns written on the board that use
me, him, her, us, them, e.g.,“Give the book to me. Give the book to him. Give the
book to her. Give the book to us. Give the book to them.” (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
3. Categorize words in HFV objective 1 into nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs; west
(n/adv), sold (v), told (v), best (adj/adv), form (n/v), far (adj/adv), gave (v), alike
(adj/adv), add (v), brave (v/adj), corn (n) (C: Days 4-5). 
Tips
Writing
For SCV objective 2, use the
Personal Pronouns poster.
For SCV objective 3,
continue to emphasize
categorizing as a form of
reformatting information.
Explain that knowing parts
of speech improves their
sentence construction and
comprehension.
Use Spalding Word Analysis CD
to identify parts of speech.
Add selected regular and
irregular past tense verbs to
the Verb Past Tense poster.
Spelling
NOTE: Section I words are
challenge for kindergarten
so dictate only 11 words this
week.
For HFV objectives 1, 4, and 5,
emphasize rules 4, 7 (silent
final e job 1), 19, and open,
closed, and sfe syllable types.
For HFV objective 3, introduce
rule 27.
 141
Planning
Academic Week 31, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to narrative text structure using The Carrot Seed* by Ruth Krauss and
identify narrative elements (C: Day 1).
2. Use a graphic organizer to sequence the story, The Carrot Seed* (M/CK/C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Put Me in the Zoo* by Robert Lopshire in unison 8-10 pages per day and
individually to develop fluent and expressive reading; retell story including key
details (C: Days 1-5).
2. Listen to teacher read the poem A Good Place to Sleep* by Margaret Hillert; identify
words and phrases that suggest feelings or appeal to the senses (emotional appeal)
(C: Days 3-4). 
Reading
For LA/F objective 2, the
asterisk beside A Good Place to
Sleep means use an available
poem that has good examples
of words and phrases that
suggest feelings or appeals to
the senses. A Good Place to
Sleep can be found in the 20th
Century Children’s Poetry
Treasury.
Tips
 142
Planning
Academic Week 32 (Section I: WRTR 274)
Spelling: The student will … ≈45 minutes
Systematic Phonics (SP)
1. Read (say) sounds of 20 phonograms that they have difficulty pronouncing
(C: OPR Steps 1 and 2-Days 1-4).
2. Read (say) and write 15 phonograms that they cannot say and write automatically
(C: WPR Step 2-Days 1-4).
High-Frequency Vocabulary (HFV)
1. Say (segment), write, and blend sounds in dance-zero in spelling/vocabulary
notebook (M/CK/C: Days 1-3). 
2. Read dance-zero for spelling and for reading (C: Days 1-4).
3. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, markings, and/or rules
for dance (job 3, sfe syllable), dinner (r. 29, closed syllable, closed syllable), doll
(r. 17, closed syllable), pick (r. 25, closed syllable), zoo (r. 27, open syllable), zero (r.
27, 4, open syllable, open syllable) (M/CK/C: Days 1-4). 
4. Analyze and apply concepts of the syllable types and division, markings, and/or rules
for dance (job 3, sfe syllable), dinner (r. 29, closed syllable, closed syllable), doll
(r. 17, closed syllable), pick (r. 25, closed syllable), zip (r. 27, closed syllable) (C:
Days 4-5 two/three per day). 
Writing: The student will … ≈20 minutes
Sentence Construction with Vocabulary Development including Parts of Speech (SCV)
1. Compose written sentences that demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar S/V
words using a variety of the four types of simple sentences (Days 1-4).
2. Categorize words in HFV objective 1 into nouns, verbs, and adjectives; dance (n/v),
dinner (n), doll (n), egg (n/v), fruit (n/adj), looks (v), pick (n/v), rich (adj), zoo
(n), zip (v), zero (n) (Days 3-4). 
Spelling
NOTE: Section I words are
challenge for kindergarten
so dictate only 11 words this
week.
For HFV objective 1, print
dinner on Primary Rule Page
2 poster and have children
read for spelling and reading.
For HFV objectives 1, 3, and 4,
emphasize rules 4, 7 (silent
final e job 3), 17, 25, 27, 29,
and open, closed, and sfe
syllable types.
Give Spalding Spelling
Assessment List 4; see
Assessing.
Give the Monthly Spalding
Spelling Assessment List
1 as the posttest to check
children’s spelling growth; if
the school year has not yet
ended by Week 32, administer
Monthly test 4 in Week 32, and
then administer the Spelling
Assessment (List 1) as the
posttest before school ends. See
Assessing.
Writing
For SCV objective 2,
continue to emphasize
categorizing as a form of
reformatting information.
Explain that knowing parts
of speech improves their
sentence construction and
comprehension.
Use the Spalding Word Analysis
CD to identify parts of speech.
Tips
 143
Planning
Reading
For LA/F objective 2, the
asterisk beside Caterpillars
means use an available poem
that has good examples of
words and phrases that suggest
feelings or appeals to the
senses. Caterpillars can be
found in the Bill Martin Jr.
Big Book of Poetry.
Academic Week 32, cont.
Reading: The student will … ≈25 minutes
Text Structure (TS)
1. Listen to narrative text structure using The Very Hungry Caterpillar* by Eric Carle
and identify narrative elements (C: Day 1).
2. Use a graphic organizer to sequence the story The Very Hungry Caterpillar*
(M/CK/C: Day 2).
Literary Appreciation/Fluency (LA/F)
1. Read Are You My Mother?* by P. D. Eastman in unison 8-10 pages per day and
individually to develop fluent and expressive reading; retell story including key
details (C: Days 1-5).
2. Listen to teacher read the poem Caterpillars* by Aileen L. Fisher; identify words and
phrases that suggest feelings or appeal to the senses (emotional appeal) (C:
Days 3-4). 
Tips
 144
Planning
Daily Integrated Language Arts Lesson Objective Template
Academic Day
Spelling: The student will … minutes
1. Read (say) sounds for 20 of 70 phonograms that children have difficulty pronouncing:
		 (OPR).
2. Say and write 15 of 70 phonograms that children write with hesitation or do not know:
		 (WPR).
3. Segment, write, and blend sounds in S/V words:
4. Read S/V words for spelling (sound or syllable).
5. Read S/V words for reading (normal speech).
6. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, or markings of S/V words:
		 .
Writing: The student will … minutes
1. Compose (oral/written) sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of unfamiliar S/V words:
		 .
2. Categorize S/V words into parts of speech:
		 .
3. Compose related sentences.
Reading: The student will … minutes
1. Identify author, author’s purpose, elements, and main idea in .
2. Read fluently and expressively.
 145
Planning
Weekly Integrated Language Arts Lesson Objective Template
Academic Week
Spelling: The student will …
1. Read (say) sounds for 20 of 70 phonograms that children have difficulty pronouncing:
		 (OPR).
2. Say and write 15 of 70 phonograms that children read with hesitation or do not know:
		 (WPR).
3. Segment, write, and blend sounds in S/V words:
		 .
4. Read S/V words for spelling (sounds or syllables).
5. Read S/V words for reading (normal speech).
6. Explain syllable types and division, pronunciation, spelling, or markings of S/V words:
		 .
Writing: The student will …
1. Compose (oral/written) sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of S/V words:
		 .
2. Categorize S/V words into parts of speech, then use in (oral/written) sentences.
3. Compose related sentences.
		
4. Compose (informative-narrative/informative/narrative) paragraphs.
Reading: The student will …
1. Identify author, author’s purpose, elements, and main idea in
(narrative/informative/informative-narrative) paragraphs.
2. Read fluently and expressively.
 146
Planning
Delivering
Kindergarten
Delivering Integrated
Language Arts Instruction
Delivering
Delivering
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION TO INSTRUCTIONAL DELIVERY IN THE SPALDING METHOD................ 1
TEACHER BEHAVIORS IN ALL LESSON TYPES....................................................................2
STUDENT BEHAVIORS IN ALL LESSON TYPES....................................................................3
SPELLING INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES AND PROCEDURES .........................5-38
PHONEMIC AWARENESS........................................................................................................5
SYSTEMATIC PHONICS...........................................................................................................7
Phonogram Sounds...................................................................................................................8
Oral Phonogram Reviews.........................................................................................................9
Preparing to Write Phonograms.............................................................................................13
Writing Phonograms in Response to Sounds........................................................................15
Reviewing Written Phonograms.............................................................................................17
HIGH-FREQUENCY VOCABULARY.......................................................................................21
Preparing for Spelling Dictation..............................................................................................21
Spelling Dictation of High-Frequency Vocabulary.................................................................23
Spelling and Language Rules.................................................................................................26
Segmenting Spelling Words and Blending Sounds...............................................................29
Fluent Reading of High-Frequency Spelling Words...............................................................31
Word Analysis..........................................................................................................................33
WRITING INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES AND PROCEDURES .........................39-70
SENTENCE CONSTRUCTION WITH HIGH-FREQUENCY VOCABULARY ..........................39
Teaching Usage of High-Frequency Vocabulary....................................................................40
Meanings of High-Frequency Vocabulary..............................................................................42
Attributes of Simple Declarative Sentences with High-Frequency Vocabulary....................45
Four Types of Simple Sentences with High-Frequency Vocabulary.....................................49
Teaching Attributes of Compound Sentences.......................................................................53
Teaching Attributes of Complex Sentences...........................................................................56
Categorizing High-Frequency Vocabulary by Parts of Speech.............................................60
Teaching Parts of Speech.......................................................................................................61
COMPOSITION USING THE WRITING PROCESS................................................................64
Composing Related Sentences..............................................................................................64
Composing Three Types of Writing........................................................................................67
Teaching the Writing Process.................................................................................................68
READING INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES AND PROCEDURES ........................71-89
TEXT STRUCTURE.................................................................................................................71
Teaching Text Structure...........................................................................................................72
LITERARY APPRECIATION....................................................................................................75
Teaching Attributes of Fine Literature....................................................................................76
Expanding Narrative Elements...............................................................................................78
Developing Fluent and Expressive Reading..........................................................................82
TEXT COMPREHENSION: MENTAL ACTIONS: ................................................................86
Teaching Mental Actions.........................................................................................................87
Delivering 1
Delivering
A successful method of instruction takes into
consideration the nature of learning, how curricula
should be delivered, how classrooms should be managed,
and what constitutes “achievement.” The Spalding
Method is …
Easily applied to any subject;
Involves children in every lesson;
Makes lessons more meaningful; and
Develops children’s critical thinking skills.
This model describes three teacher behaviors (modeling,
coaching, and scaffolding and fading) and three student
behaviors (articulation, reflection, and exploration).
The following diagram illustrates the progression of skill
acquisition. Use of the Spalding methodology makes this
progression easier for children.
TEACHER
BEHAVIORS
Modeling
Coaching
Scaffolding and
Fading
Articulation
Reflection
Exploration
STUDENT
BEHAVIORS
Skill Acquisition Trace
New Skill Short-Term Memory Long-Term Memory
Introduction to Instructional Delivery in The Spalding Method 2
Delivering
Modeling
When modeling, a teacher demonstrates and explains so children can observe and build a mental picture of the processes that
are required to accomplish the task. Although many tasks are concrete and observable, that is not the case with reasoning,
problem solving, knowledge retrieval, and decision making. Therefore, the teacher needs to make these tasks visible by thinking
out loud while describing the reasoning process. For example, during spelling lessons, teachers model precise pronunciation
of each new phonogram, precise formation of features and letters, and precise pronunciation and formation of each word in
spelling dictation. Children listen, observe, and then answer questions that check their understanding of what was modeled.
Coaching
Coaching begins after the teacher has provided one or more clear, specific models of each new spelling, writing, and reading
skill and asked questions that check children’s understanding. When coaching, the teacher guides, prompts, and provides
feedback as children perform a task, or part of one. The teacher prompts children’s memory and guides practice until children
achieve accurate performance. The goal is to bring the performance of the learner closer to that of the teacher. All children
need some type of assistance performing new tasks. Help ranges from stating the information needed to complete the task (e.g.,
telling which phonogram to use when more than one is possible) to signaling to remind children of previous learning (e.g.,
using fingers during dictation). During spelling lessons, teachers cover the phonogram card as soon as children mispronounce
a sound or sounds, then say the sound(s) correctly. The children listen and watch, then pronounce the sound(s) correctly.
During writing lessons, teachers prompt as children compose oral, and then written, sentences. In reading lessons, teachers help
children articulate attributes of literature, elements of text structure, or use of comprehension strategies.
Scaffolding and Fading
When a teacher uses scaffolding, he or she is providing a support system for children who are not yet able to perform the tasks
independently. The difference between coaching and scaffolding is in degree. During the coaching phase, the new skill is not
yet in long-term memory so most children need help most of the time. When the majority of children can accurately perform
and independently apply all or part of a skill, teachers fade (withdraw support). In spelling lessons, teachers can usually fade
quickly on single-sound consonants and easy multiletter phonograms, but they scaffold on multisound consonants, vowels,
and difficult multiletter phonograms until mastery is achieved; they fade on easy words and syllables but scaffold when words
or syllables have difficult phonograms or when more than one spelling is possible. In writing lessons, teachers can usually fade
quickly on the attributes of simple sentences but scaffold for compound and complex sentences. In reading lessons, teachers
can fade as soon as children can accurately identify precise language in literary appreciation lessons, but scaffold all year on
difficult concepts (e.g., insight and universality). Reteaching and continued scaffolding will be necessary for children unable to
perform independently.
Teacher Behaviors in all Lesson Types 3
Delivering
Student Behaviors in all Lesson Types
Articulation
After modeling and while coaching and scaffolding, the teacher requires children to verbalize the principles, rules, or situations
underlying knowledge use. This process can take place through…
Questions that check understanding
Teacher-children dialogues
Critiques of lessons or skills attempted
Summaries of learning
Putting understanding into words aids retention and helps children generalize to new situations more efficiently and discover
aspects of principles they did not understand before. Children articulate letter formation and how language rules apply to
spelling words. They explain attributes of simple sentences, elements of text structure, and mental actions that help them
comprehend.
Reflection
Upon completing a task, teachers have children compare their performance with the model to determine progress toward
proficiency. Children reflect on their performance on motor tasks, problem solving skills, and thinking processes. In spelling,
they compare their letter formation today with that of yesterday. They reflect on their improved sentence construction, and they
reflect on books they have read and explain how knowledge of text structure helps them comprehend.
Exploration
When children can perform tasks accurately, teachers provide independent practice that requires children to apply skills to new
situations, figure out how and when each skill is relevant, and take complete responsibility for their performance. For example,
they apply their decoding skills to reading independently. They independently compose three types of writing.
Using The Spalding Method of instruction provides teachers with a great deal of information because the model is interactive
and diagnostic. They know when children need more modeling, coaching, or scaffolding and when they are ready to apply a skill
to a new situation (explore). Dr. Sylvia Farnham-Diggory, former Director of Reading Study Center at the University of Delaware,
describes Spalding’s interactive instruction:
“Instructionally, a Spalding teacher has been trained to model her own analytical processes; she is trained to coach
rather than didactically preach; and she is trained in techniques of scaffolding. The whole curriculum is, in effect,
a giant scaffold. It provides a supporting structure for dealing with print. Articulation of principles is consistently
demanded of students. They must always explain and justify their reasoning. Reflection is embedded in the
marking system – the simple but effective system for annotating parts of words that exemplify rules.…Exploration
is assured through the program’s emphasis on literature. Both teacher and students plunge into new realms
together, and many is the time I’ve heard teachers express surprise and relief to discover that the principles they’ve
been teaching really do come to their rescue in literature that was never written with those principles in mind.”
(1987, 13-14, WRTR 36). 4
Delivering 5
Delivering
Phonemic awareness instruction begins on Academic
Day 1 to ensure that children understand that words
consist of individual sounds. Practice in segmenting,
counting, and blending sounds in spoken words is
provided. Segmenting and blending continue all year
in daily spelling dictation using the high-frequency
words that children will later write in their spelling/
vocabulary notebooks. Teachers should be sufficiently
familiar with these procedures so they can be carried out
automatically.
“Teaching one or two types of phoneme
manipulation—specifically blending and
segmenting phonemes in words – is likely to
produce greater benefits to your students’
reading than teaching several types of
manipulation. Teaching your students to
manipulate phonemes along with letters can
also contribute to their reading success.”
(Put Reading First, The Research Building
Blocks for Teaching Children to Read, National
Institute for Literacy, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, U.S.
Department of Education. September 2001, 8).
Spelling Instructional Strategies and Procedures
Phonemic Awareness 6
Delivering
The teacher will…
Explain that words are made up of individual sounds.
Say the spelling word (me) in normal speech.
Hold up two fingers and say the sounds (/m/ /ē/) while
pointing to each finger.
Have children say the sounds (/m/ /ē/).
The teacher will…
Count the sounds in the word (me) while pointing to
each finger.
Slowly say the sounds in the word, and have children
count the sounds.
The teacher will…
Blend the sounds (/m/ /ē/) to say the word (me).
Have children blend the sounds (/m/ /ē/) to say the word
(me).
Repeat the procedure for each Spalding spelling/
vocabulary word for segmenting, counting, and blending
sounds.
Segmenting Sounds
Counting Sounds
Blending Sounds
Phonemic Awareness Instructional Strategies
Phonemic Awareness, cont.
Spelling Instructional Strategies and Procedures, cont. 7
Delivering
The purpose for teaching children all the sounds represented by
an alphabet letter or combination of two, three, or four letters
(phonogram) is to enable them to read high-frequency words
quickly (e.g., me, do, is).
The Spalding Method teaches phonograms with handwriting
to connect speech sounds to the printed symbol using four
pathways to the brain (visual, auditory, kinesthetic, and tactile).
Read how systematic phonics is taught in WRTR and listen to
track 1 of the Phonogram Sounds CD. Begin teaching Spalding
phonogram sounds on Academic Day 2, following the sequence
in daily lesson plans in the Planning section.
“Systematic and explicit phonics instruction
significantly improves kindergarten children’s word
recognition, spelling, and reading comprehension.
It is effective for children from various social and
economic levels and those who are having difficulty
learning to read. It is most effective when introduced
early.” (Put Reading First, The Research Building
Blocks for Teaching Children to Read, National Institute
for Literacy, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, U.S. Department of Education.
September 2001, 8, 14-15).
Systematic Phonics 8
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Explain that saying the phonogram sounds
automatically helps children learn to read.
Model saying the sound or sounds of one new
phonogram four days a week.
Have children softly, yet precisely, say the phonogram
sound(s). If a phonogram has more than one sound,
have them say each one separately and distinctly.
Saying sounds precisely helps children more easily
transfer the sounds to reading words (/b/ /oy/, not
/buh/ /oy/).
Softly say the sounds with children the first day or
two after introducing new phonograms, then fade
(stop saying the sounds) so you can listen as children
pronounce each phonogram precisely.
Follow phonogram introduction each day with an
oral (and later) written phonogram review of new and
previously introduced phonograms.
Teaching Phonogram Sounds
Spelling Instructional Strategies and Procedures, cont.
Systematic Phonics: Phonogram Sounds 9
Delivering
The purpose of daily Oral Phonogram Reviews
(OPR) is to practice precise phonogram
pronunciations previously introduced (Step
1 Phonograms 1-26) and rules that govern
phonogram placement (Step 2 Phonograms
27 and above). Precisely reading (saying) the
phonogram sounds automatically is an essential
prerequisite for fluent reading and for decoding
unfamiliar words.
“The core reading subskill is forming
connections between speech and
print. More technically, this comes
down to connections between specific
speech units called phonemes and
specific letters that represent them.”
(Farnham-Diggory, S., WRTR, 2012, xii,
HarperCollins, NY).
Systematic Phonics: Oral Phonogram Reviews 10
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Provide practice of newly introduced phonograms for two or
three minutes several times during the day.
9
9 Listen intently for accurate and automatic
pronunciations.
9
9 If children mispronounce a sound(s), cover the
phonogram with your hand to signal that you will
precisely pronounce the sound(s) while they listen.
9
9 Pronounce the sound(s), then show the card and have
children say the sound(s) correctly. Follow the procedure
shown on page 12.
Sort phonograms into two piles: 1) those children
say accurately without hesitation, and 2) those they
mispronounce or pronounce with hesitation.
Continue daily OPR of difficult phonograms and less frequent
practice of all phonograms to transfer to long-term memory
(follow the sequence in the lesson objectives).
The teacher will…
Begin Step 2 when children are ready to learn phonograms
27-45.
Have children read phonograms a second time. After you
have introduced phonograms ay and ai (the first pair
governed by a rule), stop and teach the rule.
Example: “We use ay at the end of English words
because English words do not end in the phonogram i.”
Model listening for where the sound is in the word (phonemic
awareness), then apply the rule.
Oral Review of Phonogram
Sounds – STEP 1
Oral Review of Phonogram
Sounds – STEP 2 11
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
Example: “In the word day, the sound /ā/ is at
the end so I can’t use this phonogram (show ai)
because English words do not end in i. I must use this
phonogram (show ay).”
When you have taught the phonograms oy and oi, say, “We
use oy at the end of English words because English words do
not end in the phonogram i.”
Each day, check children’s understanding of phonogram
placement. Begin with knowledge questions that check
children’s understanding.
Example: “Where may I use this phonogram?” (show
oi).
When you have taught the five spellings for the sound
/er/, teach children cue words.
Example: After showing each of the phonograms er, ir,
ur, ear, say, “word.”
Have students respond by saying the correct word: “her, first,
nurse, or early.” No cue is needed for wor because it has two
sounds that are blended.
After children know and understand where these phonograms
may be used, check their ability to apply the rules to words
already written in their spelling/vocabulary notebooks.
Example: “May I use this phonogram (sh) in the word
she? Tell me why or why not.”
Next, ask application questions using words they have not
already entered in their notebooks.
Review newly introduced (46 and above) and difficult
phonograms daily. Provide less frequent practice for all
phonograms to achieve automaticity (oral review of 20
phonograms should take five to eight minutes).
Oral Review of Phonogram
Sounds – STEP 2, cont. 12
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR ORAL PHONOGRAM REVIEW – STEP 1
Accurate and Automatic Pronunciation:
Teacher: Show students the phonogram card and listen carefully for accurate pronunciation.
Students: Say (read) sound(s) in unison.
Teacher: Immediately cover card and correct mispronunciations as needed.
Pronunciation and Spelling Alternatives:
Teacher: Show students the phonograms again and be prepared to ask check for understanding questions about 		
spellings depending on their placement (e.g., ay, ai).
Students: Say (read) sound(s) in unison.
Teacher: Ask knowledge questions to clarify which pronunciation or which phonogram to use in different 			
locations within a word.
Example: “May I use this phonogram (show ai) at the end of a word? Why or why not?”
		 Quickly clarify misunderstandings (see rule 18 on WRTR 222).
Students: Respond and explain.
		
Example: “No, English words do not end in i.”
Teacher: Ask application questions to check children’s ability to apply the rule to a new word.
Example: “May I use this phonogram (show ai) in the word play? Why or why not?”
Students: Respond and explain.
		
Example: “No, English words do not end in i.”
PROCEDURE FOR ORAL PHONOGRAM REVIEW – STEP 2 13
Delivering
While kindergartners are learning the sounds of the first 26
phonograms and developing fine motor control (typically one
month), they learn six features that are used to form alphabet
letters. Read about feature formation on WRTR 42 and use the
Spalding Feature and Letter Formation posters to prepare them
for writing.
“Feature recognition is the ability to distinguish
curves and vertical, diagonal, and horizontal lines.
Research tells us the parts of the brain specialized
for distinguishing curves and lines are activated by
looking at print.” (Farnham-Diggory, 1992).
Systematic Phonics: Preparing to Write Phonograms
The Clock Face Four Points
Most Often Used
Using the clock
to write c (2 to 4) 14
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Use multisensory activities such as stringing beads,
cutting, gluing, and coloring to expand children’s
fine-motor control.
Model drawing a circle that begins at 2 on the clock
in the air. Coach as children practice drawing circles
starting at 2 on the clock in the air, then in a sand
tray, on carpet, velvet, or board (use a star or other
signal at the top of the tray or material to indicate the
location of the “up” position). Then, use the Clock
Face Card to identify the reference points on the clock.
Explain the meaning of halfway (midpoint) and
demonstrate by putting one block on top of another
and pointing to the midpoint between the blocks.
Have children practice by pointing to the midpoint
between blocks or use the Clock Face Card.
Demonstrate rolling clay to form a tall line, marking
the midpoint, and then dividing it into two equal
parts, then coach as children repeat.
Demonstrate rolling clay to represent a tall and a
short line, then coach as children repeat the same
procedure.
Demonstrate forming tall and short vertical lines on
the board, then coach as children draw tall and short
lines on the board and at their desks using the Clock
Face Card.
Model the pencil grip when children have developed
correct directionality and some fine-motor control
(WRTR 38-39).
Have children practice forming circles beginning
at 2 on the clock and going up and around
(counterclockwise) on paper, individual white boards,
or using the Clock Face Card.
Preparing to
Write Phonograms 15
Delivering
Children learn phonograms more quickly when they hear the
sound(s), say it precisely, then see the symbol they write. In The
Spalding Method, letters that begin at 2 on the clock are taught
first for practice of a single feature. When that feature has been
practiced (typically in two weeks), letters that begin with a line
are taught. Read about letter formation on WRTR 41-53.
“Training children to attend to the relevant contrasts
between letters has been shown to hasten their ability
to recognize and distinguish between them (letters).”
(Adams, 1990, 65).
Systematic Phonics: Writing Phonograms in Response to Sounds 16
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Explain that learning to write phonograms helps children
spell and have legible handwriting.
Demonstrate forming six features on the board or easel.
(Use the clock face as a reference point and refer to the
Feature Formation poster.)
Have children form six features on 5/8” lined paper.
The teacher will…
Model saying and writing one phonogram that begins at
2 on the clock each day. Begin with o, then c, (use the
precise dialogue on WRTR 45-47 and refer to the clock
letters on the Letter Formation poster).
Have children say and write phonograms that begin at 2
on the clock on 5/8” lined paper.
The teacher will…
Model saying and writing one phonogram that begins with
a line each day. Use the precise dialogue on WRTR 49-53
and refer to the line letters on the Letter Formation poster.
Have children say and write phonograms that begin with a
line on 5/8” lined paper.
Follow phonogram introduction each day with an Oral
and Written Phonogram Review. After efficient routines
are established, a WPR should take about 8 to 10 minutes,
depending on the number reviewed (maximum 15 at one
time).
Writing Phonograms
in Response to Sounds:
Letters That Begin at
Two on the Clock
Writing Phonograms
in Response to Sounds:
Six Features
Writing Phonograms
in Response to Sounds:
Letters That Begin with a Line 17
Delivering
The purpose of Written Phonogram Reviews (WPR) is to
practice spelling phonograms and legible handwriting.
Hearing and writing the phonograms is more difficult
than saying or reading them. Knowledge of phonograms is
tested by having the teacher dictate the sound(s) of each
phonogram and then having children say and write it.
WPR also has two steps (see page 20 of this section).
“Practice must be well beyond the point where the
action feels smooth and efficient. Psychologists
call this overlearning.” (Farnham-Diggory, 1992,
92).
Systematic Phonics: Reviewing Written Phonograms 18
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Decide the handwriting focus each day before a
written phonogram review; focus first on beginning
clock letters at 2 on the clock. When children are
able to do that, focus on having all letters sit on the
baseline.
Have children write the first 26 phonograms across
the page to practice correct spacing of phonograms
in words (review b and d separately).
Have children write all phonograms down the page
after multiletter phonograms have been introduced.
Establish this routine to ensure efficient WPRs:
Say and write each phonogram.
Draw a short horizontal line in place of an
unknown phonogram.
Look at the teacher after writing each one.
Have children say sound(s) softly before giving a
cue for multiletter phonograms. This ensures they
hear the correct sound(s) and think before writing.
Example: Teacher /ō/ Students /ō/ Teacher:
boat. Students /ō/ and write the phonogram
oa.
Reviewing Written
Phonograms 19
Delivering
Phonogram Instructional Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Sort phonograms into two piles: 1) those children say
and write accurately without hesitation and 2) those they
write with hesitation or cannot write.
Use immediate feedback with newly-introduced
phonograms and delayed feedback with phonograms
previously introduced (see page 20).
Provide further explanation and extra practice for
children having difficulty.
Reviewing Written
Phonograms, cont. 20
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR WRITTEN PHONOGRAM REVIEW – STEP 1
While phonograms 1-26 Are Being Practiced:
Teacher: Say sound(s) of the phonogram on the card.
Students: Say sound(s) in unison. Then say sound(s) softly just before writing the phonogram.
Immediate feedback (new phonograms only):
Teacher: Write each phonogram on the board immediately after students have written each new phonogram. Have
students cross out an incorrect phonogram and write the correct phonogram either beside the incorrect one
or beside the line designating a missed phonogram. Repeat this process until all phonograms have been
dictated.
Delayed feedback (when students can accurately say and write phonograms):
Students: In unison, dictate to the teacher the sounds for each phonogram to be written.
Teacher: Say sound(s) of each phonogram. Then say again softly just before writing on the board.
Students: Proofread their work and correct errors as needed.
While Phonograms 27-70 Are Being Practiced:
Teacher: Say sound(s) of the phonogram on the card.
Students: Say sound(s) in unison.
Teacher: Clarify phonograms when needed by providing a cue.
Initial example: For ai say, “Two-letter /ā/ not used at the end of a word.”
Later example: For ai say, “not used.”
Students: Say sound(s) softly just before writing the phonogram.
Immediate feedback (new phonograms only):
Teacher: Write each phonogram on the board immediately after students have written each phonogram.
Students: Proof for accuracy and correct any errors.
Delayed feedback (when students can accurately say and write phonograms):
Students: In unison, dictate the sound(s) for each phonogram they have written.
Teacher: Say sound(s). Wait for clarification if phonogram with more than one spelling is dictated, then softly say
and write the phonogram on the board.
Students: Proofread their work and correct errors as needed.
PROCEDURE FOR WRITTEN PHONOGRAM REVIEW – STEP 2 21
Delivering
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Preparing for Spelling Dictation
While children are learning the first 45
phonograms needed to write sections A-G words
in their primary notebooks, they also learn the
Spalding Marking System that connects speech to
print (see the marking system on WRTR 59-60).
The goal is automatic word recognition. Children
underline vowels that say their names at the end
of a syllable (rule 4) and multiletter phonograms
representing one sound (sh, th). Phonograms
representing more than one sound are numbered
(do), enabling children to learn regular and
irregular words in the order of frequency of use.
Follow strategies and procedures on the next pages
so spelling dictation will be more efficient and
effective.
“Spalding’s most remarkable contribution
is her invention of the marking system
that enables children to connect spelling
rules to reading.”
(Farnham-Diggory, Schooling, 1990, 127).
3 22
Delivering
Spelling Dictation Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Model (on the board) the formation of words that
begin with a clock letter (e.g., dad, fad, fog, sad, sag);
demonstrate how to sound each phonogram, blend them
together, and then read each word.
Model (on the board) the formation of words that begin
with a line (e.g., bag, bed, had, has); demonstrate letter
spacing.
Have children sound (segment), blend, and then read
these words.
Write sections A-G spelling/vocabulary words on WRTR
254-262 on chart paper or the board to preteach terms
(syllable, vowel, consonant), underlines, numbering,
and brackets (use detailed directions on WRTR 59-60),
and rules needed to begin spelling dictation. Begin by
underlining rule 4 vowels (me, go) and explaining rule
4 as it applies to those words. Also, explain and model
abbreviating rule 4 (r. 4).
Explain underlining two-letter phonograms (she, see),
numbering second and third sounds (do, is, the).
Have children practice writing some words on 5/8-inch
lined paper to prepare them for writing words on page 1
in their spelling/vocabulary notebooks.
Have children number each page of the primary
notebook prior to writing words (or teachers may pre-
number their notebooks) so children’s notebooks will be
identical (this is essential for the last steps of dictation:
reading for spelling and reading for reading).
Preparing for
Spelling Dictation 23
Delivering
The purpose for spelling dictation is to teach children
to apply the phonograms and rules to spelling
and reading words, enabling them to become
independent thinkers who understand the structure
of the language. The Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary
(S/V) Word List includes essential core vocabulary
words as identified in Collins COBUILD English
Dictionary (1995). After children can say and write 45
phonograms and understand the Spalding Marking
System, teach the spelling dictation procedure on page
25.
“There is emerging research support for the
proposition that getting started in reading
depends critically on mapping the letters
and spelling of words onto the spelling and
speech units that they represent. Failure
to master word recognition impedes text
comprehension.” (Preventing Reading
Difficulties in Young Children, Snow, Burns
and Griffin, 1998, 321).
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Dictation of High-Frequency Vocabulary 24
Delivering
Spelling Dictation Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Explain that the purpose for writing words in children’s
notebooks is to help them spell and read words.
Dictate words in the order presented in the S/V Word List in
WRTR. If the derived word is paired with the base word, dictate
the base word first to show how to form the derived word.
Teach each rule before it is needed to spell a word (use Primary
Rule Page posters and the directions for each). The whole rule
is not directly taught (or memorized). Rather, teach the part of
the rule that explains the spelling of individual words. Model and
provide practice of words that use that rule.
Example: “The e in me is underlined because it says /ē/ at
the end of the syllable.”
Model the spelling dictation procedure on the next page to make
the lesson efficient and effective, then coach as children sound
and write the dictated words.
Provide support only when needed, allowing children to do the
thinking and responding (see pages 2-3 for detailed explanation
of this progression from modeling by the teacher to the child’s
independence).
Have children read newly dictated words for spelling (by sound
or syllable) and for reading (by whole word) from your model on
the board.
Check notebooks daily for accuracy.
Have children frequently read previously dictated words for
spelling and for reading from their own notebooks.
Spelling Dictation of
High-Frequency Vocabulary 25
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR SPELLING DICTATION
(WRTR 64-65)
Teacher: Say the whole word as spoken in normal conversation (not by syllables).
Give a short sentence that demonstrates the meaning of the word and good sentence construction.
Use fingers to provide a visual clue of individual sounds, or use both hands to denote syllables and
sounds (see Rules on WRTR 220-223). To catch errors quickly, listen while children say sounds or
syllables. As needed, model precise pronunciation of phonograms or syllables. Have children repeat
sounds precisely.
Students: One-Syllable Words: In unison, say each phonogram. Say each again softly just before writing it.
Mark word if needed. Look at teacher.
Multi-syllable Words: In unison, say each syllable. Say each again softly just before writing it.
Mark word if needed. Look at teacher.
Teacher: Monitor children’s writing, then give a signal for them to dictate the word in unison (e.g., marker to
board).
Students: One-Syllable Words: 1) Dictate only sounds (/m/ /ē/). 2) As teacher finishes writing the word,
dictate only the sound of phonograms to be underlined (/ē/). 3) Read word. 4) Note rule and
number if applicable (r. 4).
Multi-syllable Words: 1) Dictate syllables (o ver). 2) As teacher finishes writing the word,
dictate markings /o/ /er/) and then, 3) read word. 4) Note rule and number if applicable (r. 4).
Teacher: As children dictate, write sound(s) or syllables and add markings. (If needed, clarify children’s
pronunciation or markings.)
Students: Read all words for spelling (by sound or syllable) from the teacher’s model. Read all words for
reading (as whole words) from the teacher’s model. Check own words and markings against words
and markings on board for accuracy. 26
Delivering
Spalding provides explicit instruction in
pronunciation, spelling, and language rules to help
children develop automatic application while writing
and reading. To speed spelling dictation, rules that
apply to phonogram pronunciation and placement are
introduced and practiced in Step 2 of Oral Phonogram
Review. Other rules are introduced and practiced
in the writing lesson before children write words
that illustrate the rules in their spelling/vocabulary
notebooks.
Word Builder Cards are used to help children
understand and practice the rules for adding affixes.
Follow the strategies and procedure on the next pages.
“The teacher who understands language
and how children are using it can give clear,
accurate, and organized information about
sounds, words, and sentences. The teacher
who knows language will understand why
students say and write the puzzling things
they do and will be able to judge what a
particular student knows and needs to know
about the printed word.” (Moats, 2000, 1).
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling and Language Rules 27
Delivering
Spelling and Language Rules Instructional Strategies
Spelling and Language Rules
The teacher will…
Identify words that illustrate rules before dictating the
week’s spelling words.
Preteach words that are governed by language rules in
the writing lesson following the regular procedure.
Preteach phonograms whose pronunciation, use, or
placement is governed by rules in the spelling lesson
(e.g., rules 17, 18, 19). Then, ask children to analyze (in
whole group) why certain words in the daily spelling
lesson are pronounced, spelled, or marked the way they
are (word analysis).
Example: “In the word me, the e is underlined
to remind us to say the sound /ē/ at the end of a
word.”
Check children’s understanding of rule application by
having them explain how and why selected spelling words
should be pronounced or marked.
Example: “In the word do, we put a tiny 3 above
the o to show that it says its third sound /oo/.”
Use Level 1 Word Builder Cards to teach and practice
rules that govern adding affixes.
Note: Markings and rule notations are never used with
words dictated for a spelling test or incorporated in
sentences. 28
Delivering
For rules 1–9 and 11, use the Primary Rule Pages 1-4 posters and
the directions included with each poster.
Preteach rules 17-19 in the spelling lesson before dictating will
(r. 17 on WRTR 222); old (r. 19 on WRTR 222); and may (r. 18 on
WRTR 222).
Review rules as needed to achieve mastery (WRTR 220-223).
Teach Essential Concepts
Model
Thinking
Think out loud as you apply new rules to words included in daily
dictation.
Check for
Understanding
Have children explain application of the rule(s) to the new
spelling word(s) rather than recite the rule(s) in isolation. For
example, when asked to explain the pronunciation of the word
me, children should reply,
		“The e in me says ē because it is at the end of a syllable.” When
asked to explain the spelling of the word will, children 		
reply something like this, “We write another l because will is
one syllable and the l follows a single vowel saying /ĭ/.”
Coach as Children
Practice
Coach as children write, mark, and explain pronunciation or
spelling of appropriate words on the board. For example, in
sections A–G, daily practice in the spelling lesson will focus on
rules 4, 5, 6, 17, 18, and 19. In whole group, discuss and revise
as needed. Continue to have children explain the application
of previously introduced rules until they can apply the rules
automatically.
Check
Application
Have children independently write and mark one or two words at
their desks; then apply the rules to other words in sections A-G.
Finally, have children independently apply pronunciation and
spelling rules.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING SPELLING AND LANGUAGE RULES
(WRTR 75-76) 29
Delivering
The purpose for the daily reading of spelling words by
sound or syllable – and then reading them as whole
words – is to practice segmenting and blending.
Segmenting whole words into sounds helps children
spell and decode unfamiliar words. Blending these
sounds (phonemes) into whole words speeds word
recognition. Children who can rapidly segment words
and blend phonemes become independent readers more
quickly. Watch the Kindergarten Spalding in Action DVD
to see this process demonstrated.
“Systematic and explicit phonics instruction
is most effective when introduced early. It
should include teaching letter shapes and
names, phonemic awareness, and all major
letter-sound relationships. As instruction
proceeds, children should be taught to use
this knowledge to read and write words.”
(Put Reading First, The Research Building
Blocks for Teaching Children to Read, National
Institute for Literacy, National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, U.S.
Department of Education. September 2001, 15).
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Segmenting Spelling Words and Blending Sounds 30
Delivering
Reading for Spelling Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Have children read the newly-dictated words each day
by sound or syllable (/m/ /ē/), and then blend sounds
to form words as they are pronounced in normal speech
(“me”).
Have children read previously dictated words by sound or
syllable, and then blend the sounds to form words as they
are pronounced in normal speech (having children read
across the columns some days and down the columns
other days transfers the words to long-term memory).
Have children choose notebook pages some days (you
choose on other days).
Continue this process until children automatically spell
these words correctly on tests and in sentences.
Segmenting High Frequency
Spelling Words and
Blending Sounds 31
Delivering
Daily reading of dictated spelling words helps
develop automatic word recognition (word fluency).
Children hear the teacher say the word. They
say each sound just before they write the word,
then see what they have written as they read it.
This procedure fixes words firmly in children’s
memories. Precise pronunciation clarifies the
sounds for children and helps them become
clear speakers and accurate readers. Watch the
Kindergarten Spalding in Action DVD to see this
process demonstrated.
“Research indicates that the most critical
factor beneath fluent word reading is
the ability to recognize letters, spelling
patterns, and whole words, effortlessly,
automatically, and visually. Moreover,
the goal of all reading instruction-
comprehension-depends critically on this
ability.” (Adams, 1990, 14).
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Fluent Reading of High-Frequency Spelling Words 32
Delivering
Reading for Reading Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Have children read all of the newly-dictated words in
a normal speech pattern each day without stopping to
segment each.
Have children read previously-dictated words in
normal speech regularly in the same manner (having
children read across the columns some days and down
the columns other days transfers the words to long-
term memory).
Have children choose notebook pages some days (you
choose on other days).
Continue this practice until children automatically
read these words in text.
Fluent Reading of
High-Frequency Spelling Words 33
Delivering
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Word Analysis
The purpose for daily word analysis practice is to
study the structure of words (morphology). Word
analysis practice includes syllabication, pronuncia-
tion, spelling, and/or markings. As children prog-
ress through the grades, they encounter thousands
of words they have not been directly taught. To be
independent readers, they must be able to accurate-
ly and automatically pronounce (decode) words
so they can connect these words with their spoken
vocabulary or identify them as unfamiliar. Knowing
English word structure facilitates rapid pronuncia-
tion of unfamiliar multisyllable words because the
arrangement of vowels and consonants influences
the vowel sounds. Syllable division patterns can be
introduced to those kindergartners needing chal-
lenge.
“The arguments for including spelling
instruction as a major component of reading
programs are strong. Learning about spelling
reinforces children's knowledge about
common letter sequences. It also reinforces
their knowledge about spelling-sound
relationships and may help children become
aware of word parts. Because of this, spelling
practice enhances reading proficiency."
(Adams, 1990, 102-103)
"Good spellers are those who have learned
to attend to several levels of word structure-
-sounds, syllables, and meaningful parts,
as well as orthographic conventions for
representing them." (Moats, L., 1995, 48)
Word Analysis Practice
Identify the syllable type in the spelling words me and can.
Fill in the blanks.
Me is an open syllable type because it ends
in the vowel sound e .
Can is a closed syllable type because it ends in the
consonant n . 34
Delivering
Word Analysis Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Explain the terms syllable, vowels, consonants, base
word, prefix, suffix, and syllable types as needed for
initial instruction.
Explain that knowing common syllable types facilitates
rapid pronunciation of unfamiliar words.
Identify newly-dictated words that have difficult
pronunciations, spelling, markings, rules, and syllable
types.
Have children practice identifying syllable types in
unfamiliar words encountered in other content area
lessons.
Have children practice marking unfamiliar words daily.
Have children practice explaining the application
of spelling, pronunciation, and language rules for
unfamiliar words.
Have children explain the meanings of grade-appropriate
affixes encountered in spelling/vocabulary words (see
spelling and writing lesson objectives).
Syllable Types and Patterns 35
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD ANALYSIS
(WRTR 224-226)
In separate lessons after spelling dictation, use familiar S/V words to
define and explain terms needed for kindergarten:
Syllable
A syllable is a single word or the part of a word that is pronounced by a
single impulse of the voice. There is at least one vowel in every syllable
(e.g., a, at, cat).
Vowels
Vowels are the alphabet letters a, e, i, o, and u. The letter y is considered a
vowel when it says /ĭ/or /ī/.
Consonants
Consonants are all the alphabet letters that are not vowels.
Base Word
A base word is a unit of meaning that can stand alone (e.g., book), and is
the foundation for many related words when affixes are added (e.g., book,
books; please, pleas ant, un pleas ant; turn, re turn, re turn ing).
Word Root
A word root is a unit of meaning derived from other languages that cannot
stand alone but is the foundation for many English words when affixes are
added. About 60 percent of all English words have Latin or Greek origins
(e.g., in spect, in spect ed, in spect ing).
Prefix
A prefix is a letter or group of letters added to the beginning of a base word
or word root to change the meaning completely (e.g., un happy) or to
clarify by making the word more specific (e.g., re cover).
Teach Essential Concepts 36
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD ANALYSIS, cont.
(WRTR 224-226)
Suffix
A suffix is a letter or group of letters added to the end of a base word or
word root. Suffixes may add information to the meaning of the word (e.g.,
help ful), or they may indicate number (e.g., boys), time (e.g., lat er), part
of speech (e.g., catch/catch er), and tense (e.g., com ing).
Syllable Types
A syllable can be classified into one of four types:
An open syllable ends with a vowel or multiletter vowel sound. The
vowel usually says its second sound (commonly called long: me) (e.g.,
a, I, me, do, go, so, she, the, see, now, you).
A closed syllable has one or more consonants following a single vowel
or multiletter vowel sound. A single vowel usually says its first sound
(short: and) (e.g., at, on, it, is, and, old, all, will, last, must, can,
run, man, ten, tan, tin, out, oil, good, your, look, bird, feed, this,
chip, street, green, child, thank, think).
A syllable with a silent final e has one vowel followed by one or more
consonants and a silent final e. The single vowel usually says its second
sound (e.g., time, like, make, late, paste, waste).
A consonant + le syllable has one consonant followed by le. The e is
silent (e.g., a ble, ea gle, bi cy cle, lit tle, an kle, ap ple).
NOTE: Two other syllable types (R-controlled and vowel team) are
classified as multiletter phonograms in Spalding. The R-controlled vowel
(e.g., ar, or, er, ir, ur, ear, our) is considered a closed syllable because it
ends with a consonant. The vowel team (e.g., ee, ow, ou, oo, ay, ai, oy, oi,
ea, aw, au, ew, ui, oa, ough, oe, ey, igh, ie, ei, eigh, eo, eau, augh, aigh,
eu) is an open syllable because it ends with a vowel sound.
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont. 37
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD ANALYSIS, cont.
(WRTR 224-226)
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
Syllable Division Patterns
Syllable division can be labeled with one or more of these patterns:
In a consonant + le (c+le), the word is divided before the consonant
plus le (e.g., lit tle, ap ple, a ble, gen tle, un cle).
In a vowel-consonant-vowel (vcv) or consonant-vowel (cv) pattern, the
word is divided after the first vowel (e.g., o ver, be long, pa per, ze ro,
be tween). Vowels a, e, o, u usually say /ā/, /ē/, /ō/, /ū/ at the end of
a syllable (rule 4). Vowels i and y usually say /ĭ/ (big, gym), but they
may say /ī/ (si lent-rule 5, my-rules 5, 6).
In a consonant-vowel-consonant (cvc) or vowel-consonant (vc)
pattern, the word is divided after the consonant that follows the vowel
(e.g., riv er, ver y, sev en, cov er, an y).
A compound word (cw) is divided between the base words (e.g., in to, to
day, Sun day, in side, af ter noon). If either base word has more than
one syllable, divide it as a single word (af ter noon).
Multiletter phonograms (phg)(digraphs/diphthongs/R-controlled
vowels) are not divided regardless of other patterns such as vcv or vccv
(e.g., moth er, oth er, au thor, broth er, flow er).
In a vowel-consonant-consonant-vowel (vccv) pattern, the word is
usually divided between the consonants (e.g., yel low, win ter, let ter,
din ner, hap py). In a vowel-consonant-consonant-consonant-vowel
(vcccv) pattern, the word is usually divided after the first consonant in
the series (e.g., coun try, con tract, dis trict, ad dress, en trance).
Prefixes (p) always include vowels, making them separate syllables
(e.g., un a ble, re cov er, re turn).
Suffixes (s) usually include vowels, making them separate syllables (e.g.,
plant ed, on ly, set ting, com ing, eas y). The suffix ed forms a separate
syllable in only one case: when the base word ends in the sound /d/ or /t/
(ground/ground ed, plant/plant ed). The suffix y often combines with
the preceding consonant to form a syllable (guilt/guil ty).
For those kindergartners needing challenge: 38
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD ANALYSIS, cont.
(WRTR 224-226)
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
Syllable Division Patterns (cont.)
In a vowel-vowel (vv) pattern, adjacent vowels that are not multiletter
phonograms form separate syllables (e.g., tri al, pe ri od).
Model
Thinking
Using sample S/V words, explain and demonstrate counting the vowel
sounds and job 4 silent final e's to determine the number of syllables
(e.g., little has 1 vowel sound + a job 4 silent final e, 2 syllables).
Using knowledge of syllable patterns, explain and demonstrate where to
divide the syllables (e.g., lit tle is divided between the 2 t's because -tle
is a consonant plus le pattern (stable syllable).
Think out loud while identifying syllable patterns and code the word,
then pronounce the word.
Check for
Understanding
As each syllable pattern is introduced, have children needing challenge
demonstrate identifying the number of vowel sounds, the job 4 silent
final e's, and the syllables in S/V words, then label the syllable patterns to
code the words.
Coach as Children
Practice
In daily word analysis lessons, coach as children needing challenge
explain the syllable division, spelling and pronunciation rules, and
markings of S/V words. In whole group, coach as they read standard
syllable division explanations [e.g., "To read belong, divide into 2
syllables because there are 2 vowel sounds; divide after e (vcv)."]
Check
Application
Have children needing challenge independently use S/V words to write
and mark one or two words and label the syllable division patterns.
Finally, have children independently use S/V words correctly when
speaking and writing. 39
Delivering
Spalding provides extensive vocabulary development through
daily attention to children’s oral language and explicit instruction
of unfamiliar high-frequency words in the Spalding Spelling/
Vocabulary (S/V) Word List. Words in sections A-G include the ten
most-used English words and a majority of the words most-used
in reading and writing. (The first 1000 S/V words account for
85% of words used in speaking, writing, and reading.) Using these
high-frequency words to teach correct pronunciation, spelling,
usage, and meaning helps children become independent writers
and readers more quickly.
“Children learn the meanings of most words indirectly,
through everyday experiences with oral and written
language…Although a great deal of vocabulary is
learned indirectly, some vocabulary should be taught
directly.” (Put Reading First, The Research Building
Blocks for Teaching Children to Read, National Institute
for Literacy, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, U.S. Department of Education. September
2001, 35-36).
Writing Instructional Strategies and Procedures
Sentence Construction with High-Frequency Vocabulary 40
Delivering
Word Usage Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Explain that using spoken words correctly helps others
understand what children say and helps them write
sentences that they and others can read.
Listen carefully to children’s oral language to identify
teaching opportunities.
Begin explicit instruction in the usage of each S/V
word on Academic Day 1 (see lesson objectives; use the
procedure on the next page and the example dialogues
on WRTR 96-101).
Emphasize listening carefully to how each S/V word is
used in sample sentences.
Initially, devote most teaching time to word usage. The
majority of the first 700 S/V words are in the spoken
vocabulary of most kindergartners.
Provide multiple opportunities for children to use the
words in oral, then written sentences.
Teaching Usage of
High-Frequency Vocabulary 41
Delivering
Provide one or more simple oral sentences to
demonstrate correct use of each word.
Explain the use of the S/V word in each sentence.
Teach Essential Concepts
Model
Thinking
Think out loud when explaining the use of the S/V
word in each sentence.
Check for
Understanding
Ask questions that enable children to explain word
usage.
Coach as Children
Practice
In whole group, coach as children demonstrate correct
use of each word in oral sentences and explain their
reasoning.
Check
Application
Have children independently use S/V words when
speaking and later in writing.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD USAGE
(WRTR 96) 42
Delivering
Children encounter more unfamiliar words as they
progress through the S/V Word List. These high-frequency
words are the foundation for vocabulary development which
is explicitly taught in sentence construction. New words
are always learned by studying the phonetic sounds of the
spoken word. Twenty-nine rules explain how pronunciation,
spelling, and syllable division are determined (Delivering
26-28). Rules are taught as facts about the language just
before they are needed to spell a word. Thus, they are
learned from examples rather than as isolated facts.
“Students learn new words better when they
encounter them often and in various contexts. The
more children see, hear, and work with specific
words, the better they seem to learn them.” (Put
Reading First, The Research Building Blocks for
Teaching Children to Read, National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, U.S.
Department of Education. September 2001, 36).
Meanings of High-Frequency Vocabulary 43
Delivering
Word Meanings Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Identify words in each week’s S/V words that children
may not understand.
Explain that knowing the meaning of each S/V word
will help them learn to read books more quickly.
Begin explicit instruction on Academic Day 1 (see
lesson objectives). Use the procedure on the next page
and the example dialogue WRTR 102.
Provide multiple opportunities for children to use
words in oral, then written sentences.
Teaching Meanings of High-
Frequency Vocabulary 44
Delivering
Provide one or more simple oral sentences that demonstrate the
meaning of each new S/V word.
Explain each new type of word (e.g., compound, homophone,
homograph) before children write the example word in their
notebooks. Reinforce the word type with each new example.
Compound words (into and today - Sections A-G)
Explain that compound words are made by the joining of two whole words.
Each word has a meaning of its own, but when joined the meaning is
changed.
Homophones (sea /see - Sections A-G)
Explain that these words sound alike but have different meanings (and
often different phonograms). Reinforce this concept with each new set of
written homophones. Labels need not be introduced initially.
Homographs (read/read, wind/wind - Section J)
Explain that these words are spelled alike, but the pronunciations and
meanings are different. Reinforce this concept each time a new set of
homographs is written. Labels need not be introduced initially.
Teach Essential Concepts
Model
Thinking
Think out loud when using context clues to demonstrate the
meaning of unfamiliar S/V words.
Check for
Understanding
Ask questions that enable children to demonstrate
understanding of word meanings.
Coach as Children
Practice
Coach as children demonstrate correct meaning of
unfamiliar S/V words by composing oral sentences.
Check
Application
Have children independently use S/V words correctly when
speaking and later when writing.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING WORD MEANINGS
(WRTR 102) 45
Delivering
While children are writing sections A-G words in their notebooks,
model writing simple declarative sentences using these words
on the board. Use high-frequency words to teach attributes of
declarative sentences. Writing declarative sentences on the board
makes learning multisensory. Use interactive dialogue to check
children’s understanding.
When children who need challenge can write simple declarative
sentences, teach them the attributes of interrogative, exclamatory,
and imperative sentences (see page 51). These children may also
learn to compose simple compound sentences. When they write
the word if in their notebooks, teach those who need challenge the
attributes of easy complex sentences.
“Students must learn to use the appropriate standard
forms automatically, not merely by memorizing
tables or charts, but by constructing large numbers of
sentences…” (Koerner, 1959, 97).
Attributes of Simple Declarative Sentences with High-Frequency Vocabulary 46
Delivering
Simple Sentence Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Choose S/V words from previous week’s lessons that
children had difficulty understanding or spelling
or familiar words from the current week's spelling
lessons.
Explain that knowing the parts (attributes) of
declarative sentences helps them become better writers
and readers.
Begin explicit instruction in written declarative
sentences after children have written sections A-G in
their notebooks. Use the procedure that follows and the
example dialogue on WRTR 103-105.
Have children use spelling/vocabulary notebooks as
the basic source of words. When children want to use
additional words, have them sound them out. Their
ability to sound out words they have not been taught
increases as they learn additional phonograms.
Teaching Attributes of
Declarative Sentences 47
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF DECLARATIVE SENTENCES
(WRTR 103-105)
Write a short, simple declarative sentence on the board using S/V words
children can already spell and read fluently: “The boy plays.”
Explain and demonstrate the following attributes of a simple
declarative sentence:
One Thought - Subject and Verb
A simple declarative sentence contains one thought about a person, place,
or thing. The person, place, or thing is who or what the sentence is about
(subject). The action word (verb) describes what is happening. (Later, teach
linking and then helping verbs as described on WRTR 112-113.)
Beginning Capitalization and Ending Punctuation
The first word is capitalized to signal where the author’s thought begins. A
period (full stop) signals where the thought ends.
Logical order
Words and phrases are arranged in a logical order to convey meaning
(syntax).
Precise Language
Precise language is used to describe the subject (“The big boy plays.”) or
action (“The boy plays now.”).
Teach Essential Concepts 48
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF DECLARATIVE SENTENCES
(WRTR 103-105)
Think out loud while explaining capitalization, punctuation,
spelling, word use, and choice of precise language to strengthen
and clarify your sentence.
Model
Thinking
Check for
Understanding
Have children explain each attribute of simple sentences.
Have them identify missing attributes in sentences written
on the board.
Coach as Children
Practice
In whole group, coach as children use spelling words in
sections A-G to compose oral simple declarative sentences
that the teacher writes on the board. Edit in whole group.
Children who have language disabilities or difficulty with
fine-motor control continue composing oral sentences.
These children will hear explicit instruction in whole
group, participate in the dialogue, but initially compose
one or two oral sentences, identifying the attributes they
would add (capital and period) if written.
Check
Application
Then, have children independently compose oral/written
one or two declarative sentences using selected spelling
words.
Have children explain each attribute of simple declarative
sentences, identify missing attributes in sentences
written on the board, and independently compose simple
sentences. 49
Delivering
The focus of writing lessons in sections A-G is on teaching the
attributes of simple declarative sentences. After children can
compose simple oral/written declarative sentences that include all
the attributes, begin explicit instruction in identifying (labeling)
the names and attributes of four types of simple sentences.
Kindergartners begin with declarative and interrogative sentences;
then, they learn exclamatory and imperative sentences (see
page 51). Use simple terms and examples with the strategies and
procedure on the next pages.
“The literate person is in control of those techniques
special to writing. He can formulate sentences that make
sense. He can choose the right word from an array of
similar words.” (Mitchell, 1979, 170).
Four Types of Simple Sentences with High-Frequency Vocabulary 50
Delivering
Simple Sentences Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Continue to choose S/V words from previous weeks'
lessons that children had difficulty understanding or
spelling.
Explain that knowing the names of four types of
simple sentences will help them compose sentences
that convey their meaning.
Begin explicit instruction in the names of simple
sentences after children are familiar with the attributes
of simple declarative sentences. Follow the lesson
objectives and use the procedure that follows.
Have children use their spelling/vocabulary notebooks
as the basic source of words. When children want to
use additional words, have them sound the words
out. Their ability to sound out and spell words they
have not been taught increases as they learn more
phonograms.
Teach children who need challenge the attributes of
compound and complex sentences after they can
compose four types of simple sentences (see WRTR
105-108).
Teaching Four Types of
Simple Sentences 51
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING FOUR TYPES OF SIMPLE SENTENCES
(WRTR 103-105)
In separate lessons, explain the following sentence types
after children can accurately compose simple declarative
sentences that include all of these attributes:
Declarative Sentence (Statement)
A declarative sentence provides information about a person, place,
or thing (subject) and includes all attributes of simple sentences:
“Ann is tall.”
Interrogative Sentence (Question)
An interrogative sentence asks for information about the subject. It
begins with a capital letter, reverses the order of the subject and the
action or linking word (verb), and ends with a question mark: “Is
Ann tall?”
Explain use of question marks when the word may occurs in
the Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary Word List on WRTR 258;
demonstrate how the subject and verb are reversed in questions.
“The boy may play. May the boy play?”“I may go. May I go?”
Exclamatory Sentence (Exclamation)
An exclamatory sentence shows strong feeling, begins with a
capital letter, maintains subject-verb order, and ends with an
exclamation point: “Ann is tall!”
Imperative Sentence (Command)
An imperative sentence gives an order, begins with a capital,
usually omits the subject you, and ends with a period or an
exclamation point: “Sit down.”
Teach Essential Concepts 52
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING FOUR TYPES OF SIMPLE SENTENCES, cont.
(WRTR 103-105)
Lastly, have children independently compose one or
two oral, and later, written sentences of that type. After
all sentence types have been introduced, have children
categorize sentences by type and explain their reasoning.
Have them use four types of sentences appropriately when
they compose two-three sentence paragraphs in whole
group.
Check
Application
Coach as Children
Practice
After each sentence type has been introduced in whole
group, coach as children use spelling words to compose
oral sentences of that type.
Write examples on the board and have children explain
the attributes. Next, pair children to compose sentences to
be discussed and edited later in whole group.
Check for
Understanding
As each type of sentence is introduced, have children
orally define that type of sentence. For example, when
asked to explain a declarative sentence (statement),
children should say something like, “Declarative
sentences give information about people, places, or
things. The first word must begin with a capital, and the
sentence ends with a period (full stop).”
After two or more types have been introduced, ask
children to explain the differences. For example, children
might say, “An interrogative sentence (question) asks for
information instead of giving information. The action
or linking verb comes first. It ends with a question mark
instead of a period (full stop).”
Model
Thinking
Think out loud while writing examples of simple
sentences on the board and identify the attributes. 53
Delivering
Teaching Attributes of Compound Sentences
Primary children were introduced to the term com-
pound when they wrote S/V words into and today in
sections A-G. While constructing oral sentences, they
learned the words and, but (sections A-G), and or
(section I) connect persons, places, things, or action
words. After children can accurately compose the four
types of simple sentences orally, they are ready to learn
that these words can also connect two independent
sentences.
“The literate person ... can devise the structures
that show how things and statements about
things are related to one another.” (Mitchell,
1979, 170). 54
Delivering
Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Continue to expand children’s knowledge of sentence
structures by choosing S/V words from previous weeks' lessons
that they had difficulty understanding or spelling.
Explain that just as two words can be connected to form a
new word, so two sentences that relate to the same thought
can be connected.
Teach children who need challenge the attributes of
compound sentences after they can compose the four types
of simple sentences. Follow the lesson objectives and use the
procedure that follows and the example dialogue on WRTR
106-107.
After children have practiced using a comma before the
conjunction and, use the same procedure to introduce the
connecting word but: “Ann plays tag, but Ann does not play
baseball.”
Expand their knowledge by introducing the connecting word
or: “Each day we play tag, or we play baseball.”
Attributes of
Compound Sentences 55
Delivering
Review the concept of compound by discussing compound
words.
Explain and demonstrate the following concepts on the board
or easel for those children needing challenge:
Compound Sentence
A compound sentence is two independent sentences related to the
same thought and joined with a connecting word (conjunction). A
comma is used before the connecting word to show each sentence
could stand alone (independent). Other attributes of simple
sentences apply (WRTR 103-105).
Coordinating Conjunctions
The word and is used to join two related thoughts.
The word but is used to join two contrasting thoughts.
The word or is used to join two thoughts that involve choice.
Teach Essential Concepts
Model
Thinking
Think out loud as you decide whether two sentences may be
combined so children have a clear understanding of the concept
of relatedness. Model thinking out loud as you decide which
connecting word to use.
Check for
Understanding
Have children explain the attributes of compound sentences.
Have them explain which connecting word (and, but, or) to use
when combining simple sentences.
Coach as Children
Practice
In whole group, have children explain which simple sentences
may be combined and state their reasoning. Next, have children
categorize sentences into simple or compound and explain how
they differ. Then, in separate lessons in whole group, have them
compose compound sentences on the board using and, but, and
or. Proofread in whole group.
Check
Application
Lastly, have children independently compose one or two
oral/written compound sentences using and, but, and or
appropriately. After children have been introduced to paragraphs
in whole group (WRTR 108), have them use compound
sentences that use a comma with and, but, or.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF COMPOUND SENTENCES
(WRTR 105-107) 56
Delivering
Teaching Attributes of Complex Sentences
Although primary children may not have been introduced
to the term conjunction, they have learned to use the con-
necting words and, but, and or. Some children instinctively
generate complex sentences. For those children needing
challenge, explicit instruction is provided in the attributes of
easy complex sentences to avoid incorrect use of subordinat-
ing conjunctions. The focus of writing lessons is on teaching
beginners of any age the attributes of simple, compound, and
complex sentences. Children develop mastery of these basic
tools of composition by daily practice composing different
types of sentences orally and then by independently writing
sentences of each type. Explicit instruction of capitalization,
punctuation, and grammar skills is integrated and incorpo-
rated with practice of different types of sentence construction.
“The literate person ... can generate strings of sentences
that develop logically related thoughts, and can
arrange them in such a way as to make that logic clear
to others.” (Mitchell, 1979, 170-171). 57
Delivering
Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Continue to expand children’s knowledge of sentence
structures by choosing S/V words from previous weeks'
lessons that they had difficulty understanding or spelling.
Provide explicit instruction of complex sentences for those
children needing challenge before dictating if, the first
subordinating conjunction. Use the lesson objectives and the
procedure that follows.
Have children in whole group orally compose simple,
compound, or complex sentences every day.
Have children independently compose one or two oral/
written examples of simple, compound, or complex sentences
every day.
Attributes of
Complex Sentences
For those kindergartners needing challenge: 58
Delivering
Review the attributes of compound sentences: each sentence in
a compound sentence can stand alone; they are connected by
the words and, but, or (older children may also use for, nor,
yet); and punctuated with a comma.
Before the word if is written in section H, explain and
demonstrate the following concepts for those children needing
challenge. Labels need not be introduced initially.
Complex Sentence
A complex sentence is made up of an independent group of words
(main clause) and a dependent group of words (subordinate
clause). An independent clause has a noun and a verb and can
stand alone. A dependent clause has a noun and a verb, but it
cannot stand alone. Other attributes of simple sentences apply
(WRTR 103-105).
Subordinating Conjunctions
The word if is used to introduce a dependent clause. When a
dependent clause is written at the end of a complex sentence, no
punctuation is needed.
Example: “We will go outside if it does not rain.”
A comma is required when the dependent clause is written at the
beginning of a complex sentence.
Example: “If it does not rain, we will go outside.”
Teach Essential Concepts
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF COMPLEX SENTENCES
(WRTR 107-108) 59
Delivering
Model
Thinking
Introduce each conjunction used with dependent clauses just
before it is written in the notebook (if and as in section H;
after in section I).
Check for
Understanding
Have children who need challenge explain the attributes of
complex sentences. Using sentences written on the board,
have children identify the group of words that can stand
alone (independent clause) and the group of words that
cannot stand alone (dependent clause). Have them identify
the connecting word.
Coach as Children
Practice
Write compound and complex sentences on the board
and have children categorize them and explain how they
differ. Next, have them compose oral/written easy complex
sentences on the board using commas appropriately.
Check
Application
After children who need challenge have been introduced
to paragraphs (WRTR 118), have them use subordinating
conjunctions in complex sentences and include a
comma where appropriate. Older students may use other
conjunctions appropriate to grade-level.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF COMPLEX SENTENCES, CONT.
(WRTR 107-108) 60
Delivering
Children’s compositions are only as good as the individual
sentences they compose. Another tool for preparing children to
write compositions is to teach them to think about and discuss
the structure of language. Knowledge of the parts of speech
provides a vocabulary for discussing how to improve children’s
writing. Categorizing parts of speech and writing sample
sentences in whole group help children use words appropriately
when independently composing simple sentences. Children are
familiar with, and enjoy, categorizing different kinds of animals,
colors, and objects. They extend that ability in the integrated
writing lesson by categorizing different kinds of words according
to the jobs they perform. Interactive dialogue in whole group
improves retention because children learn to explain the purpose
for the different parts of speech and participate in meaningful
language practice. Being able to name, define, and explain
characteristics of a category requires higher-level thinking.
Explaining characteristics enables children to understand why
words behave differently from each other and why position in a
sentence affects meaning and sometimes punctuation.
“Such matters as the forms of verbs, the plurals and
possessives of nouns, for example, are not optional
matters…Students must learn to use the appropriate
standard forms automatically, not merely by
memorizing tables or charts, but by constructing large
numbers of sentences involving the desired forms.”
(Koerner, James M. , 1959, 97).
Categorizing High-Frequency Vocabulary by Parts of Speech 61
Delivering
Parts of Speech Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Use sections A-G words because children can spell and
read them, and they include seven of the eight parts of
speech.
Choose concrete nouns (persons, places, things) and
action verbs initially because they are the foundation for
composing simple sentences.
Teach initial lessons orally in whole group following
the daily practice of composing simple sentences of four
types.
Begin explicit instruction with nouns, verbs, and
adjectives (see lesson objectives; use the following
procedure and the example dialogues on WRTR 109-
113).
Provide explicit instruction of other parts of speech
following these procedures and the example dialogues on
WRTR 114-116.
Teaching Parts of Speech 62
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING PARTS OF SPEECH
(WRTR 108-116)
Teach Essential Concepts In separate lessons, use familiar S/V words to name, define, and
explain characteristics of the following parts of speech.
Noun (See dialogue on WRTR 109-110.)
A noun names a person, place, or thing. Nouns also name a concept
(chance, charge, time, today) or a quality (love). Nouns may be the
subject of the sentence, “Bill hit the ball.” Nouns may be the object of
verbs or prepositions. “The ball hit Bill. The ball was hit to Bill.”
Verb (See dialogue on WRTR 111-113.)
A verb expresses action, being, or state of being. An action verb
expresses the doing of something or what is happening. The action
may be physical (run) or mental (think). A linking verb expresses the
relationship between the subject noun and the noun, adjective, or adverb
following the linking verb: “Mrs. Brown is a teacher (noun). Mrs. Brown
is happy (adjective). Mrs. Brown is here (adverb).” Common linking
verbs are all forms of be (am, are, is, was, were), become, seem,
appear, remain, grow, and verbs pertaining to the senses (look, feel,
smell, sound, taste). An auxiliary (helping) verb helps to form other
verbs: “I can go. I am going.” Common helping verbs are all forms of
the following: be, can, will, may, have, shall, do.
Pronoun (See dialogue on WRTR 114-116.)
A pronoun takes the place of a noun. The pronouns I, you, he, she, it,
we, you, they take the place of a noun used as a subject: “Bill is tall.
He is tall.” The pronouns me, you, him, her, it, us, you, them take the
place of nouns used as objects: “Give the book to (speaker’s name). Give
the book to me.”
Adjective
An adjective describes or limits a noun or pronoun. Articles a, an, the
signal that a noun follows. Adjectives may describe which one (big,
little, tan) or how many (one, two). 63
Delivering
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
Model
Thinking
Using short sample sentences, explain and demonstrate
how to identify each part of speech.
Think out loud while identifying each part of speech in
short simple sentences.
Check for
Understanding
As each new part of speech is introduced, have children
define that part of speech and explain how it is used in
simple sentences.
Coach as Children
Practice
In daily integrated writing lessons, coach as children
categorize new spelling words by what they do (parts of
speech). In whole group, coach as they use the part of
speech in oral sentences.
Check
Application
Then, select a few S/V words for children to independently
use in oral/written sentences.
Lastly, have children independently compose oral/written
sentences that use different parts of speech appropriately
and then explain the use of each word they use.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING PARTS OF SPEECH, cont.
(WRTR 108-116)
Adverb
An adverb describes or limits verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs. Adverbs
may describe when (now), where (here), or how the action happened
(well), or explain to what extent (very happy).
Conjunction
A conjunction is a word that connects words, phrases, or clauses. The
conjunctions and, but, or, nor, and for connect words, phrases, or
clauses of equal rank: “Ann and Jane are friends.” The conjunctions
if, as, after, than, when, unless, because, however connect dependent
clauses with independent clauses.
Preposition
A preposition is placed before a noun or pronoun to show its relation to
some other word in the sentence (e.g., at, on, in, up, of, out, into, by,
over). The preposition with the noun or pronoun is called a prepositional
phrase. The noun or pronoun is the object of the preposition.
Prepositional phrases may describe the noun (adjective phrase) or the
verb (adverb phrase). 64
Delivering
Explicit comprehension instruction begins in kindergarten
as children listen to the teacher read aloud from narrative,
informative, and informative-narrative paragraphs. In the
writing lesson, comprehension is reinforced when children
are taught to compose two or three sentences about a
single topic during composition instruction. When children
are practicing related sentences, teachers explain and
demonstrate how to compose the different types of writing.
Understanding the concepts of related thoughts and text
structure improves comprehension and composition.
“The literate person is in control of those
techniques special to writing rather than to
speech. He can formulate sentences that make
sense. He can choose the right word…He can
devise structures that show how things and
statements about things are related to one
another. He can generate strings of sentences that
develop logically related thoughts, and arrange
them in such a way as to make that logic clear to
others…Because he can do these things, he can,
in reading, determine whether or not someone
else can do these things.” (Mitchell, 1979, 170-
171).
Composition using the Writing Process
Composing Related Sentences 65
Delivering
Related Sentence Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Teach the concept of related sentences after children
are able to compose simple sentences that include the
attributes (this would typically occur after midyear in
kindergarten).
Teach the term related by referring to family members
and explain that sentences that are related belong
together.
Begin explicit instruction of related sentences (see
lesson objectives; use the following procedure and the
example dialogue on WRTR 117-118).
Teaching Related Sentences 66
Delivering
Review the terms subject of a sentence, first- and third-person
subject pronouns, and related sentences.
Explain the term topic as the subject of two or more sentences
and demonstrate identifying related sentences and those that are
not related.
Teach Essential Concepts
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING RELATED SENTENCES
(WRTR 116-118)
Model
Thinking
Think out loud when deciding whether two or more sentences
are related.
Example: “Look at these two sentences. ‘The boy is tall. He
can reach the top shelf of the book case.’ They are both
about the boy so they are related.”
Check for
Understanding
Have children answer questions that demonstrate
understanding of the terms subject of a sentence, first- and
third-person subject pronouns, related sentences, and
topic.
Coach as Children
Practice
Coach as children categorize sentences written on the board
as related or not related. Next, have them compose oral/
written related sentences on the board and explain why
they are related. In whole group, edit for capitalization,
punctuation, spelling, and grammar (English conventions).
Check
Application
In successive lessons, have children use S/V words to
independently compose oral/written related sentences. Hold
them accountable for editing for English conventions. 67
Delivering
In the reading lessons, kindergartners are introduced to three
basic types of writing: narrative, informative (expository), and
informative-narrative. In the writing lesson, children draw upon
their knowledge of vocabulary, spelling, sentence construction,
and related thoughts to compose each type of writing. Having
a command of grade-appropriate vocabulary and spelling and
language skills enables children to concentrate on expressing
their thoughts and ideas.
By the end of kindergarten, children should compose two- or
three-sentence paragraphs in whole group about a topic of their
choice. Children easily progress from composing two or three
oral/written statements about familiar topics, such as pets or
toys, to composing a short first-person informative-narrative
paragraph (three or four sentences) about that topic. The initial
paragraph is a simple progression from related sentences.
“Reading and writing are two sides of the same coin.
Both depend on fluent understanding and use of
language at many levels. Each enhances the other.
… A variety of writing assignments appropriate to
their abilities is desirable, including production of
narratives and exposition. While they are building
the skills of letter formation, spelling, and sentence
generation, children also should be taught to compose
in stages: generating and organizing ideas, initially
with a group or partner; producing a draft; sharing
ideas with others for the purpose of gaining feedback;
and revising, editing, proofreading, and publishing.
“To teach writing well, teachers themselves should
model writing and the writing process for their
students.” (Learning First Alliance, Every Child
Reading: A Professional Development Guide. web
11/2000).
Composing Three Types of Writing 68
Delivering
The Writing Process Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Introduce the writing process in whole group after children can
consistently compose two or three sentences related to one topic.
Teach the basic attributes of paragraphs:
A paragraph contains two or more sentences about a topic.
Sentences present a logical and orderly arrangement of ideas.
		
Appropriate indentations and margins are used.
Read short (one or two paragraphs) informative-narrative
compositions. (Later, read informative, then narrative,
paragraphs); explain that composing short paragraphs helps
them become good (analytical) thinkers, communicators, and
readers. Children can read their own thoughts written on the
board.
Choose a topic that lends itself to informative-narrative writing, is
familiar to all children, and broad enough to use for the teacher’s
model, class paragraphs, and later independent compositions.
Stress that it takes time and a great deal of practice to become a
good writer. For kindergartners, modeling/coaching the writing
process in whole group typically takes at least one or two lessons.
(see lesson objectives).
Teaching
The Writing Process 69
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR USING THE WRITING PROCESS IN
THREE TYPES OF COMPOSITIONS
(WRTR 118-129)
Teach Essential Concepts Review the terms, distinguishing characteristics, and
elements of the type of writing you are teaching.
Explain and demonstrate (model, then coach) the
paragraph attributes of each type of writing. For
kindergartners, labeling the stages in the writing process is
not needed.
Prewriting
Prewriting is preparation for writing. During the prewriting stage,
writers consider their audience and purpose, choose a type of
writing, and select a topic and/or main idea. They decide whether to
write in first- or third-person and collect information.
Composing
Composing is committing thoughts to paper. During the composing
stage, writers incorporate the elements of the type of writing they
have chosen. For example, if they are writing a narrative, they
describe the characters, setting, and the series of events (plot). If
they are writing an informative paragraph, they compose a topic
sentence and sentences with facts that support the topic.
Revising
Revising is refining the composition. During the revising stage,
writers switch attention from being the author to being the reader.
They revise for preciseness (Have I used vivid verbs and precise
adjectives?), order (Does my writing flow in a logical sequence?),
meaning (Do I need more information to support my main idea?),
and purpose (Is my purpose clear, or must I clarify?). They ensure
that their vocabulary (word choice) is direct, concrete, specific, or
vivid. They also check that words and sentences are in a logical
sequence. Finally, they ensure their meaning is communicated and
their purpose is accomplished. 70
Delivering
Model
Thinking
Think out loud while demonstrating each stage. The more
explicit you are in describing your thinking, the easier it
will be for your children to write.
Check
Application
In successive lessons, have children who need challenge
use each stage of the writing process to independently
compose each type of writing. Hold them accountable
for editing for English conventions, such as capitalizing
the first word in the sentence and ending punctuation.
Check for
Understanding
For each type of writing, have children answer
questions that demonstrate their understanding of the
stages of the writing process, including the decisions
made during each stage.
Coach as Children
Practice
In whole group, coach as children practice using each
stage of the writing process to compose one or more
paragraphs for each type of writing.
Editing
Editing is reviewing for English conventions. During the editing
stage, writers review capitalization, punctuation, grammar,
spelling, variations in sentence construction, and indentations
and margins.
Publishing
Publishing is presenting to audiences in a variety of ways. These
may include reading the finished composition aloud, posting it
on the class bulletin board, displaying it in the library, or printing
it in the school paper or in some form of media presentation.
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
PROCEDURE FOR USING THE WRITING PROCESS IN
THREE TYPES OF COMPOSITIONS, cont.
(WRTR 118-129) 71
Delivering
Text Structure
During text structure lessons, children are taught that authors organize their writing differently depending on their purpose for
writing. Children are also taught to identify and name narrative, informative, and a combination called informative-narrative
elements using McCall-Harby and McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in Reading Book A and other literature selections.
Knowledge of text organization helps children focus attention on what is most important in each type of text. Different types of
writing require different levels of concentration. Rapid identification of text structure improves children’s comprehension because
it helps them focus on the important elements and adjust their reading speed as needed.
“Teach students to identify and use the text’s
organizational structure to comprehend,
learn, and remember content.” (Improving
Reading Comprehension in Kindergarten
through 3rd Grade, Institute of Education
Science, National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, September
2010-4038, 17).
Graphic organizers illustrate concepts and
interrelationships among concepts in a text,
using diagrams or other pictorial devices.
…Graphic organizers can help students
focus on text structure as they read; provide
students with tools they can use to examine
and visually represent relationships in a
text; and help students write well-organized
summaries of a text.” (Put Reading First,
The Research Building Blocks for Teaching
Children to Read, National Institute for
Literacy, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, U.S. Department of
Education. September 2001, 50-51).
Reading Instructional Strategies and Procedures 72
Delivering
Text Structure Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Teach narrative structure first because it is easier for
children to understand. Use McCall-Harby and other
short narratives. Refer to the Spalding Elements of
Narratives poster.
Teach informative text structure when children can
accurately name and identify narrative elements. Use
McCall-Crabbs Book A and other informative selections.
Do not discuss the content of the informative paragraphs
when teaching the elements of informative writing. The
focus of these lessons is only on identifying the type of
writing; refer to the Spalding Elements of Informatives
poster.
Teach informative-narrative text structure when
children can accurately distinguish between narrative
and informative writing. Use McCall-Crabbs Book A
and other informative-narrative selections. Refer to the
Spalding Elements of Informative-Narratives poster.
Model text structure lessons using the following
procedure; refer to the lesson objectives and the example
dialogues on WRTR 136-141.
Use Spalding Text Structure Cards to check
understanding (see Introduction).
Teaching
Text Structure 73
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING TEXT STRUCTURE
(WRTR 136-141)
Teach Essential Concepts
In separate whole-group lessons, read McCall-Harby and McCall-
Crabbs Book A and other literature selections to name, define,
and explain characteristics of three basic types of writing. Use
Spalding Text Structure posters to provide a visual reference (See
Introduction).
Narrative Writing (fiction)
A narrative relates an event or tells a story. The author’s purpose is to
entertain and to develop understanding about people and the world.
Basic narrative elements include characters, setting, plot, point of view, and
main idea. The author may write from a first- or third-person point of view.
The story may be make-believe (fantasy) or believable (realistic).
Informative (Expository) Writing (nonfiction)
Expository writing is organized around a topic (subject) and sets forth a
series of facts in a logical sequence. The author’s purpose is to inform,
explain, or instruct. The author writes from a third-person point of view.
Each paragraph has a stated or an implied main idea and essential
information necessary to the main idea. If the paragraph’s main idea is
stated, it is called the topic sentence. Authors usually provide additional
information to introduce, give background, elaborate on a detail, or
conclude.
Informative-Narrative Writing
Writing which combines narrative and informative elements is called
informative-narrative. The author’s purpose is to inform, explain, or
instruct in an interesting or personal way. The author may write from a
first- or third-person point of view. The following narrative and informative
elements may occur in any combination and may vary in degree.
Narrative Elements Informative Elements
Real/imaginary characters Real individuals
Real/imaginary setting Factual location(s)
Plot (sequence of events) Prominent factual information
Main idea Topic and stated/implied main idea
1st-person pronoun(s) 3rd-person pronoun(s) 74
Delivering
Kindergarten social studies texts frequently contain one or two
characters to make factual information more interesting. Some
authors write in first person to add a personal touch to factual
information. Authors of historical novels may portray real
events using fictional or real characters. They may also portray
real characters in fictional events.
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
Check
Application
Have children independently identify type of writing, the
author’s purpose, and the elements in short passages. Have
them defend their choices and cite evidence from text to
support their thinking.
Coach as Children
Practice
In separate whole-group lessons, use literary selections to
provide additional examples of three different types of writing.
Coach as children use organizers to identify each type of
writing, author’s purpose, and elements. Next, have children
defend their choices and cite evidence from text to support
their thinking.
Check for
Understanding
As each new type of writing is introduced, have children identify
the type of writing, the author’s purpose, and the elements
present. Use Text Structure Cards to check understanding.
Model
Thinking
In separate whole-group lessons, think out loud while
identifying the author’s purpose and elements of narrative,
then informative, and finally informative-narrative writing in
McCall-Harby and McCall-Crabbs Book A and other literature
selections. Next, think out loud while completing narrative,
informative, and informative-narrative organizers to make the
abstract concepts concrete. Organizers may be downloaded at
www.spalding.org under the support tab.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING TEXT STRUCTURE, cont.
(WRTR 136-141) 75
Delivering
Literary appreciation lessons have three areas of focus:
attributes of fine literature, fluent and expressive reading, and
expanded understanding of narrative elements. Beginning
on day one, children listen to fine literature read aloud. They
are taught the attributes of fine writing to enhance their
enjoyment, and so they can use them in their own writing.
Children develop fluent and expressive reading using Spalding
Series 1 Leveled Readers, and then enjoyable, fine literature
for children. They identify and label the elements of narrative,
informative, and informative-narrative writing in text structure
lessons, then expand their understanding of the elements
while listening to, and later reading passages daily. Literary
appreciation, fluency, and text structure lessons are integrated
all year.
“In literary appreciation lessons, teachers draw
students' attention to the way literature connects
with, and sometimes reflects, personal feelings and
experiences. Initially, the teacher reads expressively.
Teachers take time to discuss a well-turned phrase, to
admire or censure an event, to reread a part that is
an especially good example of skilled writing. A little
time spent talking about descriptive language can
add to the enchantment.” (WRTR 130).
Literary Appreciation 76
Delivering
Literary Appreciation Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Read fine literature aloud daily and discuss the
mental pictures evoked (see literature selections in the
Introduction).
Spend time talking about how the author’s use of precise
language (word choice) adds to the enchantment.
Ask thought-provoking questions that call for more than
factual recall.
Make allusions throughout the day to characters,
phrases, or sentences encountered in books read.
Model identifying and labeling each of five attributes
of fine literature (on separate days). Use the following
procedure, the lesson objectives, and the example
dialogue on WRTR 131-133.
Teaching Attributes
of Fine Literature 77
Delivering
Coach as Children
Practice
After daily oral reading, coach as children identify attributes
of literature and explain how each enhanced their enjoyment
and/or understanding.
Check for
Understanding
As each attribute is introduced in whole group, have children
name and define the attribute and explain how it enhances
their enjoyment or understanding.
Model
Thinking
PROCEDURES FOR TEACHING ATTRIBUTES OF FINE LITERATURE
(WRTR 132-133)
In separate lessons, name and define the following attributes. Use the
Spalding Attributes of Fine Literature poster to provide a visual reference.
Precise Language (Word Choice)
Language is direct, concrete, specific, and vivid.
Emotional Appeal
Language and situations evoke sentiments (e.g., happiness, sadness,
compassion).
Content
Information (e.g., science, history, geography) is embedded.
Insight into People and Life
Dialogue and situations enable readers to discern motives, desires, and rewards/
consequences of different behaviors.
Universality
Common traits or experiences are enjoyed by readers across time and cultures.
Check
Application
Have children independently identify attributes of literature in
library books and explain how the author’s use of the attributes
enhanced their enjoyment and/or understanding.
Teach Essential Concepts
Explain and demonstrate how to identify each attribute of literature in
selections previously read for enjoyment but not analyzed.
Think out loud when identifying each attribute in preselected paragraphs
from previous reading. 78
Delivering
Children’s understanding of narrative elements (introduced
in text structure lessons) is developed in literary appreciation
lessons. For example, they learn to distinguish between main
and supporting characters, to differentiate between settings that
are important to the story and those that are not, and to discern
the sequence of events called plot. Knowing these terms provides
children with a common vocabulary to use in class discussions.
The interactive class dialogues develop children’s critical
discernment, which help them understand stories read and to
write better stories.
“Few children learn to love books by themselves.
Someone has to lure them into the wonderful world
of the written word; someone has to show them the
way.” (Prescott, O. in Trelease, J., 1982, The Read-Aloud
Handbook, 41).
Expanding Narrative Elements 79
Delivering
Narrative Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Prepare children for reading by teaching the format,
directionality, and conventions of written text.
Read narratives to children beginning on the first day
of school. Start with the title, the author’s name, and
illustrator.
After reading the story on Academic Day 1, have
children respond to general questions such as, “Who
is this story about? Where did it happen? What was
your favorite part?”
Coordinate literary appreciation lessons (expanding
narrative elements) with text structure for those
children needing challenge.
9
9 Model identifying and labeling basic elements of
narratives using fine literature.
9
9 Then use the following procedure, the lesson
objectives, and the example dialogue on WRTR
134-135 to expand children’s understanding
of narrative elements. The sample dialogue
introduces main and supporting characters after
children have learned the basic narrative elements
in text-structure lessons. For kindergartners,
identifying main and supporting character(s) is
considered a challenge objective.
Teaching Expanded
Narrative Elements 80
Delivering
After children can readily define and identify characters,
simple settings, and events in text-structure lessons using
McCall-Harby Test Lessons in Primary Reading and
other literature books, explain and demonstrate use of
the following terms and concepts using fine literature.
Character
A character is a person or an animal or object in a story that
sometimes takes on human qualities or actions (personified).
Main characters are fully developed by 1) appearance, 2) speech
and language, 3) actions, 4) connections and relationships with
others. Supporting characters are important to the narrative but
are not described in great detail.
Setting
A narrative is set in a time and place. Artful description of time
and place prepares the scene for the events that will take place.
An integral setting is an essential and specific setting that
influences characters, plot, and theme. A backdrop setting is
relatively unimportant to the narrative.
Plot
Plot is the sequence of events that shows characters in action.
A well-constructed plot puts events in a logical order the reader
can follow, but it also produces action and conflict which
hold the reader’s interest. In a chronological plot, events
are described in the order in which they occur (beginning,
middle, end). The chronological plot is most common in young
children’s literature. When a normal time sequence is disrupted
to recount episodes from the character’s past, it is referred to
as a flashback. The flashback is more suitable for intermediate
grades.
Teach Essential Concepts
PROCEDURE FOR EXPANDING UNDERSTANDING OF NARRATIVE ELEMENTS
(WRTR 133-135) 81
Delivering
Point of View
The author writes the story from a specific point of view. In a first-person
(e.g., I, me, we, us, my, mine, myself, our, ours, ourselves) narrative,
the narrator participates in the story. In a third-person (e.g., he, she, it,
they, them, him, her, its, their, theirs, himself, herself, itself, themselves)
narrative, the narrator does not participate in the story but describes
actions, thoughts, and feelings.
Main Idea/Theme
The author conveys an underlying main idea about people, society, or the
human condition. The theme is the main idea or central meaning of the
narrative. The narrative may have multiple themes.
Teach Essential Concepts,
cont.
Check
Application
Have children independently identify author’s name, purpose
for writing, and main and supporting characters, essential and
nonessential settings, and the sequence of events in books.
Coach as Children
Practice
In successive lessons, coach as children distinguish between main
and supporting characters and essential and nonessential settings.
Coach as they recount the sequence of events within narratives
they have listened to or read.
Check for
Understanding
In separate whole-group lessons, have children define each
literary term and explain its use in narratives previously read for
enjoyment but not analyzed.
Model
Thinking
In separate lessons using paragraphs from previously read
narratives, think out loud as you identify main and supporting
characters, integral (essential to the plot) or backdrop (not
essential to the plot) settings, and the sequence of events (plot).
PROCEDURE FOR EXPANDING UNDERSTANDING OF NARRATIVE ELEMENTS, CONT.
(WRTR 133-135) 82
Delivering
Children must read words automatically so they can
concentrate on deriving meaning from text. As children
listen to the teacher reading fluently and expressively, they
learn that such reading not only provides pleasure, but
also enhances comprehension. Through reading aloud,
children learn to speak and write well, also. Finally, oral
reading reveals what each child is doing in silent reading.
Beginning in Academic Week 10, they develop fluent and
expressive reading by first reading Spalding Series 1 Leveled
Readers aloud, then other decodable readers.
“Reading aloud motivates children to practice
their reading; in fact, they don’t realize they are
practicing fluency. They are just enjoying the
stories because they can read and understand
them.” (WRTR, 2012,136).
Developing Fluent and Expressive Reading 83
Delivering
Fluent and Expressive Reading Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Read narratives fluently and expressively daily. Continue reading
fluently and expressively during literary appreciation lessons
beginning in Week 1.
Have all children read words for spelling and for reading in daily
spelling lessons because both are prerequisite skills for fluent text
reading with comprehension.
Reading for spelling develops the ability to sound out unfamiliar
words. Reading for reading develops automatic word fluency.
Explain that punctuation marks are signals that tell which words
go together, when to pause, and when to lower or raise the voice.
This prepares children for reading fluently and expressively.
Model reading fine literature books fluently and expressively so
children will be ready to read the first Spalding Series 1 Leveled
Reader after 30 phonograms have been practiced (typically Week
10).
Coach as children read Spalding Series 1 Leveled Readers fluently
and expressively (in unison and individually).
Identify those children who have difficulty decoding; have them
read spelling words for spelling and for reading more often, then
select easy passages to have them preread and then reread with the
class to build confidence and provide needed practice. Children
must be proficient at sounding out words before sustained silent
reading can help them develop fluency.
Identify those who need more instruction reading expressively;
model expressive reading, then make time for them to read
frequently. If children are having difficulty with oral reading,
silent reading is premature because it inclines children to guess or
continue reading even when the text does not make sense.
Use the following procedure and the lesson objectives. Use the
Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist to identify specific needs of
individual children.
Teaching Fluent and
Expressive Reading 84
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING FLUENT, EXPRESSIVE READING
(WRTR 135-136)
Explain that the goal of oral reading is to clearly convey the author’s
thoughts and feelings. Explain that authors select the words they use with
great care to convey just the meaning they intend.
Using appropriate narrative paragraphs, explain and demonstrate the
following attributes:
Accuracy
Reading is identifying exactly the words that are there (not guessing or
substituting). Authors carefully select the exact words they want to convey their
meaning; therefore, inserting, deleting, or substituting words for what the author
wrote is inaccurate reading.
Fluency
Reading smoothly without hesitation is necessary for comprehension. In oral
reading, like speaking, read words consecutively. Do not pause for each word.
Phrasing
Reading words together that go together conveys the author’s intended meaning
and enhances comprehension. A period (full stop) indicates the end of a complete
thought. Therefore, the word at the end of a sentence is never read with the word
beginning the next sentence. A comma indicates that the words separated by a
comma are not read together. The comma is needed to make the meaning of the
sentence clear.
Intonation
Appropriately raising or lowering the pitch of the voice when reading aloud
enhances listeners’ comprehension and enjoyment. The pitch is lowered at the
end of statements and raised at the end of questions. The pitch is raised or lowered
depending on the character’s emotional state (anger, sadness).
Enunciation
Articulating speech sounds distinctly when reading aloud enhances listeners’
pleasure and comprehension (reading spelling words for reading in the spelling
lesson trains children to speak distinctly).
Teach Essential Concepts 85
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING FLUENT, EXPRESSIVE READING, cont.
(WRTR 135-136)
Check
Application
During oral reading of content area subjects, have
children read fluently and expressively using distinct
enunciation and appropriate intonation.
Coach as Children
Practice
In daily oral reading, have children begin each new
story by reading the title, the author’s name, and
illustrator.
Make sure each child has the opportunity to read
aloud at least once a day. If necessary, read more than
one story.
Without prior teaching of new words, have children
softly sound out unfamiliar words to develop
the technique they will follow when reading
independently. When a child needs help, say only
the sound or syllable that is causing the problem.
(No other child should help unless asked to do so by
the teacher. The teacher should teach when help is
required.)
Model
Thinking
In separate lessons, think out loud as you explain
and demonstrate how each of these attributes
influences enjoyment and comprehension.
Check for
Understanding
As each new attribute is introduced in whole group,
have children define that attribute and explain how
each enhances their enjoyment and comprehension.
Have children identify where the author’s thought
begins and ends. Have them explain how a comma
influences their oral reading. 86
Delivering
Children who are able to analyze their own thinking while listening and
reading increase their comprehension and thereby significantly improve
their performance in language arts and content-area subjects. Spalding
teachers demonstrate and label comprehension strategies (mental
actions) while children listen to narrative, informative, and informative-
narrative paragraphs. These strategies help children clarify meaning
when comprehension breaks down. Very young children instinctively
engage in these mental actions while listening. Toward the end of the year,
kindergartners can learn to identify and label them.
“Teach students how to use reading comprehension strategies.
Good readers use many forms of thinking and analyzing text
as they read. …What a strategy is: Intentional mental actions
during reading that improve reading comprehension. Deliberate
efforts by a reader to better understand or remember what is
being read. What a strategy is not: Instructional activities such
as completing worksheets. Worksheets rarely include instruction
in what students should do actively in their heads to improve
comprehension. Exercises that are aimed at giving student
practice with skills such as sequencing or drawing conclusions,
but that lack explicit instruction in how to think in these
ways during reading. (Improving Reading Comprehension in
Kindergarten through 3rd Grade, Institute of Education Science,
National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance,
September 2010-4038, 10-11).
Text Comprehension: Mental Actions 87
Delivering
Five Mental Actions Instructional Strategies
The teacher will…
Explain that thinking about our thinking
(metacognition) helps us understand what we hear and
read and figure out things we do not understand.
Model identifying and labeling the first three mental
actions while listening to narrative, informative, and
informative-narrative paragraphs in McCall-Harby
and McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in Reading
Book A.
Use the first three Mental Action Cards to check
children’s understanding.
Explicitly teach children needing challenge to identify
and label reformatting and mentally summarizing
after they can identify and label the first three mental
actions. Use McCall-Harby, McCall-Crabbs Book A
paragraphs and other selections.
Use all five Spalding Mental Action Cards (see
Introduction) to check children’s understanding.
Using the following procedure, refer to the lesson
objectives and the sample dialogues on WRTR 142-148
and on pages 11-17 in the Comprehension Connection
for McCall-Harby and McCall-Crabbs Book A.
Paragraphs used to identify and label elements may be
reused. Do not discuss the content of the paragraphs.
The focus is only on using and naming the mental
actions.
Teaching Mental Actions 88
Delivering
Name, define, and demonstrate use of the first three mental
actions in whole-group lessons (see the Spalding Mental
Action strips to provide a visual representation).
Monitoring Comprehension
Monitoring comprehension means checking understanding of
words, phrases, and sentences to identify unfamiliar words or
concepts (active listening/reading). Children may use the term
checking understanding instead of monitoring comprehension.
Making Connections
Making connections means linking stated information with
information already learned to draw conclusions (infer) and
elaborate. (Initially, make connections only about meaning of
unfamiliar words.)
Making Predictions
Making predictions means forecasting, supporting, and/or revising
forecasts using stated information and information already
learned. (At first, predict only type of writing.)
Check for
Understanding
Ask children to name and define the mental actions you used
and to explain how using the first three mental actions helped
them comprehend the short passage.
Model
Thinking
Think out loud as you monitor comprehension and identify
only one unfamiliar word, make connections to figure out
the meaning, then predict only type of writing (within the
first few sentences). In a separate lesson, think out loud and
name the mental action as you monitor comprehension, make
connections, and predict type of writing.
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING MENTAL ACTION STRATEGIES – PART 1
(WRTR 142-144)
Teach Essential Concepts
In whole-group lessons, coach as children describe their
thinking and name the mental actions as you read passages in
narrative, informative, and informative-narrative selections.
Have children use the first three mental actions while listening
and, later, reading three types of texts using passages in
Spalding Practicing and Assessing Comprehension.
Check
Application
As soon as children can accurately identify the three basic types of writing:
Coach as Children
Practice 89
Delivering
PROCEDURE FOR TEACHING MENTAL ACTION STRATEGIES - PART 2
(WRTR 144-148)
Coach as Children
Practice
Coach as children describe their thinking and name and define
the last two mental actions as different passages are read.
Model
Thinking
In whole-group lessons, think out loud while reformatting
information in short passages in McCall-Harby, McCall-Crabbs
Book A, and other selections to distinguish between essential and
additional information. Then continue thinking out loud while
using the essential information to confirm or derive the main
idea.
Name, define, and demonstrate the last two mental actions:
Reformatting
Reformatting means reorganizing and categorizing information
into new forms (e.g., lists, outlines) to use for the immediate task or
file for later use.
Mentally Summarizing
Mentally summarizing means confirming or deriving the main idea
using stated information and information already learned.
Teach Essential Concepts
Check for
Understanding
Think out loud while using the last two mental actions while
reading a short passage. Have children name and define the
mental actions you used. Have them explain how they enhanced
comprehension.
Check
Application
Have children independently apply each of the five mental
actions as they listen to passages read from Spalding Practicing
and Assessing Comprehension and any type of print.
When children who need challenge can accurately name and explain how to monitor
comprehension, make connections, and predict type of writing: 90
Delivering
Assessing
Kindergarten
Assessing Skills Mastery
Effective teachers use a variety of assessment formats
and methodologies. Within The Writing Road to
Reading program, assessment is both informal (e.g.,
observing a child’s daily performance and progress),
as well as formal (e.g., measuring skills attainment on
quizzes and tests). Performance assessments measure
observable actions, such as the ability of a child to say
and write phonograms or to spell grade-appropriate
words accurately. Spalding Spelling, Writing, and
Reading Assessments are also incorporated to measure
how well each child is doing relative to his or her peers.
The purpose of this section is to help teachers monitor
each child’s progress as part of an effective assessment
routine. This section includes spelling, writing, and
reading assessment strategies and the Spalding
Spelling Assessments to make testing and record
keeping easy.
Forms referenced in this section are also available
under the support tab at www.spalding.org.
Introduction to Assessing Skills Mastery 2
Assessing 3
Assessing
Kindergartners are not formally pretested. On the first academic
day of school, begin listening to children’s oral language and
their responses to phonemic awareness, phonogram introduction,
and prewriting activities (see Delivering). Spelling assessment
begins by observing children who have difficulty hearing vowel
or consonant sounds and children’s performance on daily oral
phonogram reviews and on weekly phonogram assessments.
Spelling word assessment begins after children have started writing
sections A-G of the Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary Word List in
their spelling/vocabulary notebooks (typically the fourth month
of school). Assessment is accomplished through daily observations
of children’s performance as they write words in their notebooks,
daily quizzes, weekly assessments, and monthly Spalding Spelling
Assessments. Daily and weekly quizzes of newly dictated words
gauge short-term memory of phonograms and language rule
structure, while monthly Spalding Spelling Assessments measure
the long-term memory required for skill mastery.
The Spalding Spelling Assessments consist of eight standardized,
fifty-word tests of equal difficulty.1
In The Writing Road to Reading
program, the Spalding Spelling Assessments are used to determine
monthly progress as well as to provide one source of data by which
teachers may refine instruction at the classroom and individual
levels. All children are assessed at the end of the year (to confirm
mastery and demonstrate growth during the year).
The following strategies make daily and ongoing spelling
assessment a natural part of teaching.
Spelling Assessment
1The original spelling assessments were developed by J. Cayce Morrison, Ph.D. and William A. McCall, Ph.D. The former was a Specialist in Educational
Measurements at the State Department of Education, Albany, New York, while the latter was a professor of educational psychology at Teachers College,
Columbia University, New York. The words were selected from the Extended Ayres List of high-frequency words compiled by Dr. Leonard P. Ayres and Dr. B.
R. Buckingham and are the foundation of the Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary Word List. Their norms represent average achievement for 57,337 children.
The grade scores for each test range from Grade 1.0 to Grade 13.0 (first-year of college). 4
Assessing
Systematic Phonics: Phonogram Assessment Strategies
Daily Oral Phonogram
Introduction and Review
The teacher will…
Listen carefully to children’s pronunciation of one new
phonogram each day and identify children who have
difficulty hearing or saying the sound(s). (See tips on
Evaluating Skills Mastery page 6). Following this plan,
children will have been introduced to and practiced 43
phonograms by Academic Week 12 and 70 phonograms by
Week 23.
Monitor children’s progress during each daily Oral
Phonogram Review (OPR) of phonograms previously
introduced (maximum 20/day). Use the Oral Phonogram
Review (OPR) procedure in Delivering.
Ask knowledge and application questions during OPR
Step 2 to monitor children’s understanding of phonogram
pronunciation, placement, and spelling.
Record phonograms that need pronunciation practiced
daily.
The teacher will…
Monitor children’s progress as they develop correct
directionality when writing each new phonogram.
Monitor their progress during each daily Written
Phonogram Review (WPR) using Spalding 5/8” lined paper.
Record phonograms that need letter formation practiced
daily.
Identify children who need additional help for small-group.
instruction (see Evaluating Skills Mastery page 9).
Daily Written Phonogram
Introduction and Review
 2010 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Written Phonogram Assessment
Name Date 5
Assessing
Systematic Phonics: Phonogram Assessment Strategies, cont.
Weekly Oral Phonogram Review The teacher will…
Administer weekly Oral Phonogram Reviews
(OPRs) (maximum 20 phonograms) in whole
group to measure accurate and automatic
pronunciation.
Observe, assess, and identify children who need
additional practice with phonogram sounds.
Administer the Individual Oral Phonogram
Assessment to children from whom more
detailed, diagnostic information is needed.
Use the assessment form found in this
section to measure accurate and automatic
pronunciation.
Individual Oral Phonogram Assessment
Name: Date:
Directions: Place a check beside each phonogram the child pronounced accurately and automatically.
o sh ed
c ee ew
a th ui
d ow oa
f ou gu
g oo ph
s ch ough
qu ar oe
b ay ey
e ai igh
h oy kn
i oi gn
j er wr
k ir ie
l ur dge
m wor ei
n ear eigh
p ng ti
r ea si
t aw ci
u au
v or
w ck
x wh
y
z 6
Assessing
Systematic Phonics: Phonogram Assessment Strategies, cont.
Weekly Written Phonogram Review The teacher will…
Administer a Written Phonogram
Review (WPR) each week (maximum
15 phonograms) to measure letter
formation and accurate and automatic
spelling of phonograms. Use Spalding
5/8” lined paper and the procedure in
Delivering. WPR begins on Academic Day
10 in kindergarten when children begin
writing the phonograms.
Identify children who need reteaching or
more practice in small group.
Record phonograms that need to be re-
taught or included in daily WPRs until
mastery is achieved.
 2010 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Written Phonogram Assessment
Name Date 7
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies
The teacher will…
Listen for precise pronunciation during initial spelling
dictation (Week 13): Each sound should be short and
crisp, e.g., vowels should not be elongated (aaa), or
consonants extended (buh vs /b/). Listen for vowels in
unaccented syllables, words in which Rule 29 applies,
and the like.
Each day listen carefully to children’s reading for
spelling from your model on the board:
9
9 Have children read one-syllable words by sound
and multisyllable words by syllable.
Assess children’s notebooks for legible handwriting,
accurate spelling, markings, and rule notations after
daily dictation. Place a tiny check beside errors. Assess
absentees’ notebooks after they have written all words
in their notebooks using your notebook as a model.
Give daily quizzes (three days a week beginning in Week
14) of five dictated spelling words on 5/8” lined paper to
identify words for reteaching and/or additional practice.
Put a small check beside each error.
Assess daily board work and word analysis and check
application of rules:
9
9 Elicit oral responses to check children’s
understanding of English rule structure.
9
9 Identify skills children need to be retaught or to
continue practicing.
Give weekly quizzes (beginning in Week 14) on 5/8”
lined paper to identify words for reteaching and/or
additional practice. Put a tiny check beside each error.
Daily and Weekly
Spelling Word Assessments 8
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Administer the first monthly Spalding Spelling Assessment for
kindergarten after children have written sections A-G in their
notebooks in Week 21. (See Assessments in this section.)
Use List 1 for both the first test and the post-assessment.
(Children’s scores on the post-assessment should be at least
one year above their grade placement to assure subject area
competence and a smooth transition to the next grade.)
Complete the following in advance of each assessment:
9
9 Make a copy of the Spelling List 1 form found in this
section for each child.
9
9 Practice the exact pronunciation of the words to be tested
each month in the Spalding Spelling Assessments. Do
not exaggerate sounds/syllables; rather, use Merriam
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th Edition, as the
standard. Children often surprise teachers by spelling
correctly words considered difficult for kindergarten or
by failing to spell words considered easy for kindergarten.
9
9 Review the instructions for dictating the Spalding
Spelling Assessments listed on the next page. Use only the
illustrative sentences in which these words are contained.
For List 1, say “run — The boy can run — run”.
9
9 Remove all distracting elements from the environment
and post a testing notice to discourage interruptions
while a test is in progress.
9
9 Reduce the possibility of copying by checking desk
arrangement and monitoring during the assessment.
9
9 Provide sharpened pencils and have extra pencils
available.
Preparing Children for
Monthly Spelling
Word Assessments
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 1
1. run The boy can run. run
2. top The top will spin. top
3. red My apple is red. red
4. book I lost my book. book
5. sea The sea is rough. sea
6. play I will play with you. play
7. lay Lay the book down. lay
8. led He led the horse to the barn. led
9. add Add these figures. add
10. alike These books are alike. alike
11. mine That bicycle is mine. mine
12. with Mary will go with you. with
13. easy Our lessons are not easy. easy
14. shut Please shut the door. shut
15. done Has he done the work? done
16. body The chest is a part of the body. body
17. anyway I shall go anyway. anyway
18. omit Please omit the next verse. omit
19. fifth This is my fifth trip. fifth
20. reason Give a reason for being late. reason
21. perfect This is a perfect day. perfect
22. friend She is my friend. friend
23. getting l am getting tired. getting
24. nearly Nearly all of the candy is gone. nearly
25. desire I have no desire to go. desire
26. arrange Please arrange a meeting for me. arrange
27. written I have written four letters. written
28. search Search for your book. search
29. popular He is a popular boy. popular
30. interest Show some interest in your work. interest
31. pleasant She is very pleasant. pleasant
32. therefore Therefore I cannot go. therefore
33. folks My folks have gone away. folks
34. celebration There will be a celebration today. celebration
35. minute Wait a minute. minute
36. divide Divide this number by ten. divide
37. necessary It is necessary for you to study. necessary
38. height What is your height?. height
39. reference He made reference to the lesson. reference
40. career The future holds a bright career for you. career
41. character He has a good character. character
42. separate Separate these papers. separate
43. committee The committee is small. committee
44. annual This is the annual meeting. annual
45. principle The theory is wrong in principle. principle
46. immense The man is carrying an immense load. immense
47. judgment The teacher’s judgment is good. judgment
48. acquaintance He is an acquaintance of mine. acquaintance
49. discipline The army discipline was strict. discipline
50. lieutenant He is a lieutenant in the army. lieutenant 9
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Have children clear desks and then print their names at
the top of the form.
Give directions distinctly, at moderate speed, paying
careful attention to emphasis. Speak loudly enough for all
children to hear without difficulty. Courteously insist upon
prompt attention from the start.
Dictate only ten words from List 1 as a pretest after
children have written sections A-G in their spelling/
vocabulary notebooks in Week 21. Dictate sufficient words
to ensure assessment of all children’s abilities.
Avoid preliminary coaching and special helps during the
assessment.
Use the following standardized introductory remarks.
Example: “I will now dictate some spelling words.
This is not a test; it tells me what I need to teach you.
I will pronounce each word, use it in a sentence, and
pronounce it again.If you do not know how to spell a
word, draw a line in the space, and wait for the next
word.Try to spell as many words as you can.Be sure to
dot the i’s and j’s and cross t’s.”
Collect papers as soon as children have written the last
word.
Administering the Initial Monthly
Spelling Assessment
 2013 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 1 and Post Assessment
Name Date
# Correct ______ Grade Status ______ S/V Section ______ 10
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Check each misspelled word. Count American or
British spelling as correct depending upon locale (see
Spalding Spelling/Vocabulary Word List in WRTR). (To
avoid subjective scoring, the standard of correctness is
absolute accuracy.)
Consider the following as errors:
9
9 letter reversals
9
9 the letters i or j if they do not have a dot
9
9 the letter t if it is not crossed
9
9 words not pronounced (e.g., “tops” for the word
“top,” or “men” for “man”)
Consider a word’s spelling as incorrect if in doubt.
Count the number of words spelled correctly and record
this information on each child’s assessment.
Draw a line on each child’s assessment to separate the
words that are mostly correct from those that are mostly
(or all) incorrect. (This is the child’s instructional level.)
Use the Spalding Spelling Assessment Scoring Guide
found in this section to determine each child’s grade
status and record it on each child’s assessment. (The
grade status compares the child’s achievement with the
norms.)
Scoring the Initial Monthly
Spelling Assessments
Spalding Spelling Assessment Scoring Guide
Name Date
Directions: Dictate sufficient words to insure that you assess all children’s ability on the first
assessment. Dictate 20 words as a Post Assessment.
Words
Correct
Grade
Status
Spelling/Vocabulary
Word List Section
0 0.0
1 1.3 A-G
2 1.3 A-G
3 1.7 A-G
4 1.8 A-G
5 1.9 A-G
6 2.0 A-G
7 2.1 H
8 2.2 H
9 2.3 I
10 2.4 I
11 2.5 J
12 2.6 J
13 2.7 K
14 2.9 K
15 3.1 L
16 3.3 L
17 3.4 M
18 3.5 M
19 3.7 N
20 3.9 N
21 4.1 O
22 4.2 O
23 4.3 O
24 4.5 P
25 4.7 P
26 4.9 Q
27 5.1 Q
28 5.2 R
29 5.4 R
30 5.6 R 11
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Administer subsequent spelling assessments for
kindergarten in Weeks 25, 29 (using the monthly
assessments found in this section) and the post-
assessment (List 1) in Week 32.
Administer monthly test 4 in Week 32 (if the school
year has not ended by Week 32) and administer the
post-assessment (List 1) before the school year ends.
Have children write the list number (2-4) for the
assessment and their names.
Use the same procedure, but dictate enough additional
words each month to ensure assessment of all
children’s abilities.
Compare the pre-assessment grade status with the
post-assessment grade status to determine gain.
Use the Spalding Spelling Assessment Progress Report
each month for monitoring.
Administering Subsequent Monthly
Spelling Assessments
 2013 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Spalding Spelling Assessment List ________
Name Date
# Correct ______ Grade Status ______ S/V Section ______ 12
Assessing
High-Frequency Vocabulary: Spelling Word Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Copy the Spalding Spelling Class Progress Report found
in this section to record each child’s grade status.
List children in alphabetical order and record each
child’s Grade Status (GS) score in the appropriate
column.
Keep tests secure for future use. (Do not return
children’s papers because they are used only for
diagnostic purposes.)
Preparing Achievement Data from
Spelling Assessments
Spalding Spelling Class Progress Report
Teacher: Year:
School: Grade:
Directions: On about the same day each month, record each child’s grade status score on each
successive Spalding Spelling Assessment List.
Name List 1 List 2 List 3 List 4 List 1 Gain 13
Assessing
Children’s writing will be only as good as their
understanding of the attributes of simple sentences,
grade-level vocabulary, and knowledge of sentence writing
conventions. In The Writing Road to Reading program,
the informal assessment of writing skills begins as teachers
listen to children’s oral sentences.
Formal assessment follows teacher modeling, coaching,
and checking for understanding of each skill category: four
types of simple sentences that demonstrate meaning and
usage of unfamiliar vocabulary and related sentences (see
Delivering). In whole group, children compose informative-
narrative, informative, and narrative paragraphs (see
Delivering). Although kindergartners are taught the writing
process, they are not assessed on their paragraphs.
Writing Assessment 14
Assessing
Sentence Construction Assessment Strategies
The teacher will…
Prepare children for the writing assessment by using the
strategies and procedures for writing four types of simple
sentences in Delivering. Determine children’s readiness
for assessment when they can:
9
9 Identify parts of speech and plurals.
9
9 Accurately identify the attributes of simple
declarative and interrogative sentences written on
the board.
Assess children on written exclamatory and imperative
sentences after they have mastered writing simple
declarative and interrogative sentences.
Preparing for
the Writing Assessment 15
Assessing
Sentence Construction Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Have children use selected spelling words to compose
one or two oral/written simple declarative sentences that
include all attributes on 5/8” lined paper.
Then, have children use selected spelling words to
compose one or two oral/written simple declarative
sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning of
unfamiliar spelling words each week on 5/8” lined paper
(see Delivering).
Next, have children compose one or two oral/written
interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences on
5/8” lined paper after each has been introduced in whole
group (see Delivering).
Finally, have children compose two or three oral/written
related sentences after they can consistently compose
simple sentences on 5/8” lined paper (see Delivering).
Keep a portfolio of children’s written sentences for
evaluating progress throughout the year.
Administering the
Writing Assessment 16
Assessing
Spalding Sentence Writing Checklist
Name: Date:
Directions: Place an “M” beside each objective mastered.
Attributes of Simple Declarative Sentences Related Sentences
A written declarative sentence includes … Two or three related sentences that include:
One thought (subject and verb) One topic
Beginning capitalization Subjects and verbs
Capitalization of proper nouns Beginning capitalization
Period Correct ending punctuation
Commas in series (if needed) Logical order of words and phrases
Logical order of words and phrases Precise language
Precise language
Interrogative Sentences
A written interrogative sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Question mark
Exclamatory Sentences
A written exclamatory sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Exclamation mark
Imperative Sentences
A written imperative sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Period
Sentence Construction Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Administer a Writing Assessment for each child to identify
areas that need reteaching and more practice in either
whole class, small group, or by individuals.
Use the Spalding Sentence Writing Checklist in this
section after each type of sentence has been introduced.
Begin assessing sentence construction orally in Week
8 (declarative), Week 10 (interrogative), Week 13
(exclamatory) and Week 16 (imperative).
Retain children’s checklists in their portfolios so they
can be updated periodically as they master each set of
skills. (The checklists serve as an effective tool for parent
information.)
Scoring the Sentence
Writing Assessment 17
Assessing
Children’s successful reading comprehension is dependent upon
learning and understanding the attributes of literary appreciation,
text structure, the mental actions (comprehension strategies),
and reading fluently. Informal reading assessment begins when
children can accurately identify precise language and emotional
appeal in literary appreciation lessons. Assessments continue
as children label elements of narrative, then informative, and
lastly informative-narrative writing. Teachers informally assess
text structure while reading short narrative, informative, or
informative-narrative passages in McCall-Harby, McCall-
Crabbs Book A, and other literature selections. Children use Text
Structure Cards to demonstrate knowledge and understanding of
the elements in each type of writing.
The Spalding Series 1 Leveled Readers are used to measure
reading fluency. Use the Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist
found in this section.
Next, teachers informally assess children’s ability to use the
first three mental actions necessary for skilled comprehension.
Teachers read short narrative, informative, or informative-
narrative passages as children use Mental Action Cards to identify
and label the first three mental actions.
The Spalding Practicing and Assessing Comprehension book
passages are used to formally assess students’ knowledge of
narrative, informative, and informative-narrative text structure
and mental actions (comprehension strategies) and are followed
by questions that test basic- and higher-level comprehension
in a yes or no choice format. The informative and informative-
narrative passages are interdisciplinary in nature and include
many science and social studies topics, thereby providing practice
comprehending expository print.
All these reusable books and materials are used to assess a single
child, small groups, or an entire class.
Reading Assessment 18
Assessing
The teacher will…
Begin assessing children’s oral reading accuracy and
fluency after they have been reading chorally for
about one month.
Record each child’s performance on the Fluent and
Expressive Reading Checklist found in this section.
Use the data to identify phonograms that need to be
retaught and need more practice.
Identify children who need reteaching or more
practice in small group.
Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist
Name Date:
Story/Passage: Grade:
Accuracy
Reads words that are there
Omits sounds/syllables/words
Inserts/sounds/syllables/words
Decodes unfamiliar words easily
Mispronounces sounds frequently
Has difficulty blending sounds
Decodes unfamiliar words
inconsistently
Does not attempt to decode words
Fluency
Reads words, phrases, sentences
without hesitation
Reads words slowly
Reads words consecutively
Phrasing
Reads words together that go together
to convey meaning
Ignores punctuation
Inconsistent response to punctuation
Intonation
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
sentences
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
character expression
Reads in a monotone
Enunciation
Articulates speech sounds distinctly
General Observations
Holds book too close
Holds book too far away
Volume too loud
Volume too soft
Lack confidence
Scoring the Fluent and Expressive
Reading Assessment
Fluent and Expressive Reading Assessment Strategies 19
Assessing
Comprehension Assessment Strategies
The teacher will…
Determine children’s readiness for assessment when they
can:
9
9 Accurately identify elements in three types of writing
and
9
9 Name and explain the first three mental actions.
Prepare children for the reading assessment (Weeks
15-22) by using the procedures for answering
comprehension questions in the Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension book.
Explain that their knowledge of literary appreciation, text
structure, and mental actions will help them focus on
important elements and apply the mental actions.
Explain that the questions after each passage will show
how well they understand what they hear.
Demonstrate the assessment procedure in advance.
9
9 Read a Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension paragraph, each question, and the
two choices: Yes or No.
9
9 Model the use of a “thumbs up” for a Yes and a
“thumbs down” for a No.
9
9 Model circling “Yes” or “No” using the
Comprehension Assessment Answer Form.
9
9 Follow the procedures for assessing comprehenion in
the Teacher’s manual for Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension.
Preparing Children for the
Comprehension Assessments 20
Assessing
Comprehension Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will …
Think out loud while considering whether the
information is stated or whether connections are
needed to infer the answer; then, think out loud and
model selecting the correct answer.
Model how to read and analyze recall versus
inferential questions.
Demonstrate proving the answer is correct by referring
to words, phrases, or sentences in the paragraph.
Think out loud and use prior knowledge and words in
the paragraph to remember answers suggested but not
stated.
Model reading each answer again and signaling
(thumbs up) or circling “Yes” or “No” when the
correct answer is read.
Preparing Children for the
Comprehension Assessments, cont. 21
Assessing
Comprehension Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Coach children by reading examples of Spalding
Practicing and Assessing Comprehension passages and
subsequent questions before beginning the assessment:
9
9 Have children analyze questions in whole group.
9
9 Have children signal or circle correct responses as
each question and Yes or No choices are read.
9
9 Have children explain their choices. For example,
have them connect key words in questions with
related words in passages.
9
9 Have children identify answers stated in the
passage.
9
9 Reread sentences if needed to clarify.
9
9 Have children explain the connections they made to
infer the answer if the answer is not stated.
Preparing Children for the
Comprehension Assessments, cont.
2013, Spalding Education International
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Name
Date
Passage #
1. Yes No
2. Yes No
3. Yes No
4. Yes No
5. Yes No
6. Yes No
7. Yes No
8. Yes No
9. Yes No
10. Yes No
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Name
Date
Passage #
1. Yes No
2. Yes No
3. Yes No
4. Yes No
5. Yes No
6. Yes No
7. Yes No
8. Yes No
9. Yes No
10. Yes No 22
Assessing
Comprehension Assessment Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Use the Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension passages for assessing listening/reading
comprehension when children can accurately identify
and label the first three mental actions (comprehension
strategies) and understand how to signal answers to
questions (about Week 23).
Read a Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension passage and each question. Children
will circle yes or no on the Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form found in this section.
Collect the answer forms after children complete the
assessment.
Identify children who need reteaching or more practice
for small-group instruction.
Administering the
Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension Assessment 23
Assessing
Assessment & Record Keeping Forms 24
Assessing 25
Assessing
Individual Oral Phonogram Assessment
Name: Date:
Directions: Place a check beside each phonogram the child pronounced accurately and automatically.
o sh ed
c ee ew
a th ui
d ow oa
f ou gu
g oo ph
s ch ough
qu ar oe
b ay ey
e ai igh
h oy kn
i oi gn
j er wr
k ir ie
l ur dge
m wor ei
n ear eigh
p ng ti
r ea si
t aw ci
u au
v or
w ck
x wh
y
z 26
Assessing
 2010 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Written Phonogram Assessment
Name Date 27
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 1
1. run The boy can run. run
2. top The top will spin. top
3. red My apple is red. red
4. book I lost my book. book
5. sea The sea is rough. sea
6. play I will play with you. play
7. lay Lay the book down. lay
8. led He led the horse to the barn. led
9. add Add these figures. add
10. alike These books are alike. alike
11. mine That bicycle is mine. mine
12. with Mary will go with you. with
13. easy Our lessons are not easy. easy
14. shut Please shut the door. shut
15. done Has he done the work? done
16. body The chest is a part of the body. body
17. anyway I shall go anyway. anyway
18. omit Please omit the next verse. omit
19. fifth This is my fifth trip. fifth
20. reason Give a reason for being late. reason
21. perfect This is a perfect day. perfect
22. friend She is my friend. friend
23. getting l am getting tired. getting
24. nearly Nearly all of the candy is gone. nearly
25. desire I have no desire to go. desire
26. arrange Please arrange a meeting for me. arrange
27. written I have written four letters. written
28. search Search for your book. search
29. popular He is a popular boy. popular
30. interest Show some interest in your work. interest
31. pleasant She is very pleasant. pleasant
32. therefore Therefore I cannot go. therefore
33. folks My folks have gone away. folks
34. celebration There will be a celebration today. celebration
35. minute Wait a minute. minute
36. divide Divide this number by ten. divide
37. necessary It is necessary for you to study. necessary
38. height What is your height?. height
39. reference He made reference to the lesson. reference
40. career The future holds a bright career for you. career
41. character He has a good character. character
42. separate Separate these papers. separate
43. committee The committee is small. committee
44. annual This is the annual meeting. annual
45. principle The theory is wrong in principle. principle
46. immense The man is carrying an immense load. immense
47. judgment The teacher’s judgment is good. judgment
48. acquaintance He is an acquaintance of mine. acquaintance
49. discipline The army discipline was strict. discipline
50. lieutenant He is a lieutenant in the army. lieutenant 28
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 2
I. can I can go with you. can
2. ten I have ten cents. ten
3. old How old are you? old
4. six I am six years old. six
5. ice He slipped on the ice. ice
6. child The child is ill. child
7. his His arm was broken. his
8. that That is my dog. that
9. far How far are you going? far
10. form Form a circle. form
11. glad l am glad to see you. glad
12. same Her name is the same as mine. same
13. night Owls come out at night. night
14. cent I haven’t a cent. cent
15. within Keep within the law. within
16. point Point toward the north. point
17. money How much money do I owe you? money
18. picture Whose picture is this? picture
19. change Do not change your position. change
20. number Number your papers. number
21. struck He was struck by lightning. struck
22. personal It is a personal matter. personal
23. address Do you know her address? address
24. several I have several hats. several
25. known I have known her a week. known
26. their Their homes were flooded. their
27. perhaps Perhaps you are right perhaps
28. popular Golf is a popular game. popular
29. against He fell against the wall. against
30. treasure The hidden treasure was found. treasure
31. investigate I will investigate for you. investigate
32. certain I am certain of the date. certain
33. really Are you really going?. really
34. conference The teachers had a conference. conference
35. business His business is important. business
36. citizen Mr. Smith is a good citizen. citizen
37. elaborate The decorations were elaborate. elaborate
38. association They formed a large association. association
39. evidence We have plenty of evidence. evidence
40. secretary My secretary is accurate. secretary
41. character He has a good character. character
42. cordially He welcomed us cordially. cordially
43. especially I am especially happy today. especially
44. disappoint I will not disappoint you. disappoint
45. decision The boy made an excellent decision. decision
46. parliament We attended Parliament. parliament
47. recommend Can you recommend that book? recommend
48. endeavor Endeavor to do your best. endeavor
49. privilege It is your privilege to go. privilege
50. villain The burglar was a villain. villain 29
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 3
1. is He is here. is
2. now Come now. now
3. little Little children play. little
4. did Did you go? did
5. hat Put on your hat. hat
6. hot The rolls are hot. hot
7. was She was here yesterday. was
8. ran Bob ran. ran
9. told She told a story. told
10. sold He sold his top. sold
11. hope l hope to go away. hope
12. room This is your room. room
13. light The light hurts my eyes. light
14. stamp Stamp the letter. stamp
15. push Push the door open. push
16. third The third problem is easy. third
17. few I have read few books. few
18. wire The basket is made of wire. wire
19. tax People tax themselves. tax
20. there There goes the postman. there
21. raise Raise the window. raise
22. request Your request will be granted. request
23. truly The money is truly yours. truly
24. cities Many people live in cities. cities
25. sail Boats sail on water. sail
26. whose Whose apple is this? whose
27. attempt Attempt to spell correctly. attempt
28. search Search carefully for your book. search
29. consider I will consider your request. consider
30. complete John’s work is complete. complete
31. piece Would you like a piece of cake? piece
32. system The city has a water system. system
33. national Our national flag is beautiful. national
34. refer To whom do you refer? refer
35. absence Can you explain your absence? absence
36. majority We will do what the majority wish. majority
37. unfortunate It was an unfortunate accident. unfortunate
38. session The next session will be important. session
39. discussion We had an interesting discussion. discussion
40. experience What experience have you had? experience
41. proceed Proceed with the explanation. proceed
42. practical This is a practical example. practical
43. preliminary This is a preliminary report. preliminary
44. receipt Keep the receipt. receipt
45. possess What talent do you possess? possess
46. restaurant Who owns this restaurant? restaurant
47. parallel Parallel lines never meet. parallel
48. physician He is a good physician. physician
49. kerosene Kerosene is an oil that bums. kerosene
50. pneumonia Heavy colds cause pneumonia. pneumonia 30
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 4
1. she Is she at home? she
2. man That man is good. man
3. good Be a good boy. good
4. this This book is mine. this
5. over The ball is over the fence. over
6. say You must say your prayers. say
7. belong Does this pen belong to you? belong
8. stand Please stand up. stand
9. sick The doctor is sick. sick
10. foot I hurt my foot. foot
11. sister My sister is here. sister
12. inside Come inside the tent. inside
13. mail Please mail my letter. mail
14. two I have two apples. two
15. began I began work last week. began
16. watch Watch that man. watch
17. happen It does not happen often. happen
18. sight I lost sight of the bird. sight
19. bridge The bridge is large. bridge
20. front The front of the car is smashed. front
21. elect I hope they elect my choice. elect
22. refuse I refuse to go. refuse
23. pleasure It was a great pleasure. pleasure
24. vacation I had two months’ vacation. vacation
25. repair I must repair my wheel. repair
26. surprise It will be a surprise. surprise
27. select Please select your gifts. select
28. weigh How much do you weigh? weigh
29. publication It was a good publication. publication
30. adopt He will adopt the child. adopt
31. century That happened a century ago. century
32. assist Will you assist me? assist
33. summon Please summon help. summon
34. invitation I accept the invitation. invitation
35. automobile I have a new automobile. automobile
36. colonies The colonies will govern themselves. colonies
37. foreign She is of foreign birth. foreign
38. arrangement I like the arrangement. arrangement
39. campaign The campaign started today. campaign
40. imagine Can you imagine such a thing? imagine
41. extreme His tastes are extreme. extreme
42. organization It is a large organization. organization
43. immediate I had an immediate reply. immediate
44. employees The employees had a raise in pay. employees
45. accommodate I will gladly accommodate you. . accommodate
46. superintendent He is the superintendent. superintendent
47. allege I allege he is not guilty. allege
48. stationery He gave me a box of stationery. stationery
49. vaguely His impression was vaguely remembered. vaguely
50. sovereign The sovereign prince is ill. sovereign 31
Assessing
 2013 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Spalding Spelling Assessment List 1 and Post Assessment
Name Date
# Correct ______ Grade Status ______ S/V Section ______ 32
Assessing
 2013 Spalding Education International. All rights reserved.
Spalding Spelling Assessment List ________
Name Date
# Correct ______ Grade Status ______ S/V Section ______ 33
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Assessment Scoring Guide
Name Date
Directions: Dictate sufficient words to insure that you assess all children’s ability on the first
assessment. Dictate 20 words as a Post Assessment.
Words
Correct
Grade
Status
Spelling/Vocabulary
Word List Section
0 0.0
1 1.3 A-G
2 1.3 A-G
3 1.7 A-G
4 1.8 A-G
5 1.9 A-G
6 2.0 A-G
7 2.1 H
8 2.2 H
9 2.3 I
10 2.4 I
11 2.5 J
12 2.6 J
13 2.7 K
14 2.9 K
15 3.1 L
16 3.3 L
17 3.4 M
18 3.5 M
19 3.7 N
20 3.9 N
21 4.1 O
22 4.2 O
23 4.3 O
24 4.5 P
25 4.7 P
26 4.9 Q
27 5.1 Q
28 5.2 R
29 5.4 R
30 5.6 R 34
Assessing
Class Instructional Level Tally Sheet
1. run Sections A - G 26. arrange Section Q
2. top 27. written
3. red
4. book 28. search Section R
5. sea 29. popular
6. play 30. interest
7. lay Section H 31. pleasant Section S
8. led 32. therefore
9. add Section I 33. folks Section T
10. alike 34. celebration
35. minute
11. mine Section J
12. with 36. divide Section U
37. necessary
13. easy Section K
14. shut 38. height Section V
39. reference
15. done Section L 40. career
16. body
41. character Section W
17. anyway Section M 42. separate
18. omit
43. committee Section X
19. fifth Section N 44. annual
20. reason
45. principle Section Y
21. perfect Section O 46. immense
22. friend
23. getting 47. judgment Section Z
48. acquaintance
24. nearly Section P 49. discipline
25. desire 50. lieutenant
Directions: To determine the class's instructional level, place a tally representing each student's
instructional level in the box designating the section of the spelling/vocabulary word list. 35
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Class Progress Report
Teacher: Year:
School: Grade:
Directions: On about the same day each month, record each child’s grade status score on each
successive Spalding Spelling Assessment List.
Name List 1 List 2 List 3 List 4 List 1 Gain 36
Assessing
Spalding Spelling Class Progress Report, cont.
Name List 1 List 2 List 3 List 4 List 1 Gain 37
Assessing
Spalding Sentence Writing Checklist
Name: Date:
Directions: Place an “M” beside each objective mastered.
Attributes of Simple Declarative Sentences Related Sentences
A written declarative sentence includes … Two or three related sentences that include:
One thought (subject and verb) One topic
Beginning capitalization Subjects and verbs
Capitalization of proper nouns Beginning capitalization
Period Correct ending punctuation
Commas in series (if needed) Logical order of words and phrases
Logical order of words and phrases Precise language
Precise language
Interrogative Sentences
A written interrogative sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Question mark
Exclamatory Sentences
A written exclamatory sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Exclamation mark
Imperative Sentences
A written imperative sentence includes:
Attributes of simple sentences
Period 38
Assessing
Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist
Name Date:
Story/Passage: Grade:
Accuracy
Reads words that are there
Omits sounds/syllables/words
Inserts/sounds/syllables/words
Decodes unfamiliar words easily
Mispronounces sounds frequently
Has difficulty blending sounds
Decodes unfamiliar words
inconsistently
Does not attempt to decode words
Fluency
Reads words, phrases, sentences
without hesitation
Reads words slowly
Reads words consecutively
Phrasing
Reads words together that go together
to convey meaning
Ignores punctuation
Inconsistent response to punctuation
Intonation
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
sentences
Raises/lowers voice appropriately for
character expression
Reads in a monotone
Enunciation
Articulates speech sounds distinctly
General Observations
Holds book too close
Holds book too far away
Volume too loud
Volume too soft
Lack confidence 39
Assessing
2013, Spalding Education International
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Name
Date
Passage #
1. Yes No
2. Yes No
3. Yes No
4. Yes No
5. Yes No
6. Yes No
7. Yes No
8. Yes No
9. Yes No
10. Yes No
Comprehension Assessment
Answer Form
Name
Date
Passage #
1. Yes No
2. Yes No
3. Yes No
4. Yes No
5. Yes No
6. Yes No
7. Yes No
8. Yes No
9. Yes No
10. Yes No 40
Assessing

Evaluating
Kindergarten
Evaluating Skills Mastery
 1
Evaluating
Introduction to Evaluating Skills Mastery
Data-driven instruction is an ongoing (rather than linear)
process. Romalda Spalding believed that “teaching is a constant
stream of professional decisions made before, during, and after
interaction with children.” She wanted teachers to be “decision
makers.” (WRTR 11).
The term evaluation as it is used in The Writing Road to Reading
program, refers to the process by which teachers use the wealth
of formal and informal assessment data gathered during the
classroom experience as the starting point for the next phase of
classroom planning.
The Spalding Method maximizes opportunities for learning
because it is diagnostic. This means teachers…
Continuously evaluate children’s performance and assessment
data to plan appropriate instruction of evidence-based
components;
Continuously plan sufficient practice activities; and
Differentiate instruction to meet the needs of children who
struggle and those who need more challenge.
To differentiate instruction, teachers need to know and understand the nature of the reading and writing processes and the
principles of reading development, skill learning, and instruction. Teachers need to understand that …
Reading and writing are complex skills composed of many subskills.
Reading and writing skills are acquired in stages.
Children vary in their levels of skill mastery.
Children achieve best if they 1) analyze each new task, 2) practice to the point of automaticity, and 3) develop attention
control.
Children who are at risk can be identified by specific characteristics as early as preschool.
Early identification and intervention are the keys to helping all children be eager and successful learners.
Ongoing cycles of planning, instructional delivery, assessment, and evaluation help teachers constantly “fine tune” the
instructional process and increase the probability that each child will master the skills taught in the grade-level interdisciplinary
language arts program.
The purpose of this section is to help Spalding teachers become effective instructional decision makers.
CONTINUOUS
PROGRAM
IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING
DELIVERING
ASSESSING
EVALUATING
 2
Evaluating
As teachers review performance data, they
identify concepts, skills, or procedures that
children have mastered. (Typically about 80% of
a general education classroom.)
During that process, they identify concepts,
skills, or procedures that need to be retaught
to the entire class and those that need to be
retaught to one or more children in small-group
sessions.
Each year, a few children will need preteaching
and/or reteaching of phonemic awareness,
phonics, vocabulary, fluency, and text
comprehension strategies to achieve mastery
by year’s end. For some of these children, the
problem is merely limited vocabulary and
unfamiliarity with print, and they respond
quickly to explicit, interactive, diagnostic
instruction in small group.
Some other children, however, have specific language-based disorders such as dyslexia. These children have severe difficulty
with many subskills of reading and writing and need more intense instruction and much more practice all year.
Reviewing the data also enables teachers to identify and design independent activities and assignments for those children who
need challenge. These activities should always align to the lesson objective and enhance children's learning.
Why Reviewing Performance Data Helps Teachers Differentiate Instruction
 3
Evaluating
The Spalding Method incorporates a combination of
explicit, interactive, diagnostic instruction in the whole
group followed by interventions and enhancements in
small groups. During whole group instruction, teachers
explain the purpose of each new task to enhance
children's attention and increase their motivation
to learn. They ask higher-level questions for those
children who learn easily. Those who are struggling,
or new to Spalding, are asked questions that require
knowledge, understanding, or application of skills and
concepts just modeled.
Differentiating instruction for all children is essential
for meeting individual needs and teaching at the
correct level of difficulty. The Florida Center for
Reading Research defines differentiated instruction as:
"Differentiated instruction is matching instruction
to meet the different needs of learners in a given
classroom." (2006, p. 1) Spalding's performance
criteria for differentiating instruction is listed below.
The Spalding teacher will provide:
High-quality language arts instruction using lesson objectives in the Planning section of the Grade-Level Teacher
Guides.
Explicit, interactive, diagnostic whole-group instruction using strategies and procedures in the Delivering section of the
Grade-Level Teacher Guides.
Individual or small-group instruction is . . .
Based on children's data and observations.
Flexible groupings, varying in size, children, number of days, and types of structure.
Ample practice for children having difficulty and challenge for children who learned the skill or concept after the first model in
whole group is provided . . .
During the designated 2-hour spelling, writing, and reading time block.
Before/after school as needed and approved by administration and parents.
Independent assignments and activities for those children who learn easily are aligned to the objectives and enhance their
learning. Four general strategies that expand children's learning are used when planning independent assignments.
Expand the day's lesson objective to the next level of difficulty.
Integrate spelling, writing, reading, science, or social studies content within the lesson objective.
Encourage reflection.
Encourage exploration aligned to the lesson objective.
For successful whole- or small-group instruction, an environment that allows learning to occur is essential.
Differentiating Instruction to Meet the Needs of All Children
 4
Evaluating
Class Atmosphere Evaluation Strategies
Creating an Environment
Conducive to
Ongoing Evaluation
The teacher will …
Provide a quiet, orderly classroom that allows
children's responses to be heard.
Observe and respond to expressions of confusion or
frustration.
Seat all children facing the front for direct
instruction in spelling, writing, and reading lessons
to enable observations of each child's performance
and to focus children's attention on the lesson
content.
Seat children who have difficulty up front so their
performance can be observed and assistance can be
provided immediately.
Provide alternative study areas for small-group
and individual instruction and learning activities.
Preteach and/or reteach children having difficulty
in a small group so they will experience success in
whole group.
 5
Evaluating
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data
Teachers evaluate children's daily, weekly, and monthly
assessment data so the correct level of difficulty is maintained
and planning for small-group interventions is implemented.
At the beginning of the year during the spelling lesson,
teachers focus on accurate and automatic pronunciation of
phonogram sounds, legible and neat letter formation, and
accurate and automatic segmenting and blending of sounds
of high-frequency vocabulary.
As the year progresses, teachers evaluate children's spelling
and marking of words written in their spelling/vocabulary
notebooks; their spelling and handwriting on quizzes; and
their application of rules, syllable structure, and syllable types.
 6
Evaluating
Phonemic Awareness Evaluation Strategies
Phonemic Awareness
Strategies
The teacher will …
Provide flexible small-group practice for children having
difficulty hearing or saying vowel sounds (e.g., /ĕ/ and
/ĭ/):
9
9 Explain that the mouth remains open when saying
vowel sounds; each vowel sound is determined by
how the mouth is shaped as the air passes through.
9
9 Demonstrate the position of your mouth, lips, and
tongue as you form each vowel sound.
9
9 Have children watch their mouths in small mirrors
as they say each vowel sound.
9
9 Coach and monitor as children practice saying the
sounds until they hear and feel the difference on
their larynx.
Provide flexible small-group practice for children having
difficulty hearing or saying consonant sounds (e.g., /b/,
/p/):
9
9 Explain that the airflow is obstructed (blocked) in
different ways when forming consonant sounds.
Example: The consonant sound /b/ is made
by letting air build behind the lips before the
sound is released from the mouth (voiced).
9
9 The consonant sound /p/ is also made by letting air
build behind the lips, but only air is released from
the mouth (unvoiced).
9
9 Demonstrate the position of the mouth, lips, and
tongue as you form each consonant sound.
9
9 Have children place their hand in front of their
mouths to feel the difference between voiced (e.g.,
/b/ or /l/) and unvoiced (e.g., /p/ and /t/) consonant
sounds.
9
9 Use the explanations accompanying the
phonograms listed in WRTR 208-215.
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
 7
Evaluating
Systematic Phonics Evaluation Strategies
Analyzing Daily
Oral Phonogram Reviews
The teacher will…
Evaluate children’s pronunciation daily to identify
frequently mispronounced phonograms 1-26.
Begin sorting phonograms into two piles in Week 5 or before:
9
9 20 phonograms that most children need to practice daily.
9
9 Phonograms that most children need to practice less
frequently.
Alternate the phonograms skipped.
Example: If b, f, h, and j are skipped on Day 23, skip
k, l, m, and n on Day 24.
Reteach in whole group, correct mouth and tongue
positions and model correct pronunciation for all difficult
phonograms.
9
9 Allow time for children to explain correct mouth and
tongue positions and reflect on their performance.
9
9 Include these phonograms in daily OPRs until mastered
by the majority of children.
9
9 Identify frequently mispronounced phonograms 27-70
(Step 2).
9
9 Evaluate children’s responses to knowledge and
application questions.
Reteach in small group, correct mouth and tongue positions.
9
9 See Phonemic Awareness strategies in this section.
9
9 Use the Spalding phonogram pronunciation CD or
Phonogram Sounds DVD.
Selecting the Appropriate
Phonograms for Ongoing
Oral Phonogram Reviews
f
ou
 8
Evaluating
Systematic Phonics Evaluation Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Evaluate children’s accuracy on daily WPRs:
9
9 Sort phonograms into two piles: those most children
need to practice every day and those that need less
frequent practice.
9
9 Include phonograms the majority missed in daily
WPRs.
9
9 Provide small-group reteaching and practice on
phonograms missed by only a few children.
Provide a handwriting focus for each daily review. Use
the following criteria to evaluate children’s performance
on daily WPRs. See WRTR 43-44, 66.
Manuscript Handwriting Criteria
All letters sit on a base line.
For letters that begin at 2 on the clock, rounding
conforms to the curve of the circle. Every round
letter should fit on the same-sized circle.
Lines begin at the top and are straight and
parallel. All letters that go below the base line go
the same distance below the base line as above it.
Letters or parts of letters are of two sizes. They
are either tall or short. Tall letters or tall parts
approach but do not touch the line above; short
letters or short parts are half as high as tall
letters. They begin at the midpoint between the
height of a tall letter and the base line.
Dots and crossbars are tiny, formed just above
the midpoint; crossbars are formed in the
direction in which we write.
Analyzing Accuracy and Handwriting
on Daily Written Phonogram Reviews
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
 9
Evaluating
Systematic Phonics Evaluation Strategies, cont.
Differentiating Handwriting
Instruction to Meet Children's Needs
CONTINUOUS
PROGRAM
IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING
DELIVERING
ASSESSING
EVALUATING
The teacher will…
Identify problem feature and letter formations and model
them correctly in whole group. Use the Feature and Letter
Formation posters for visual references.
Allow time for children to articulate correct feature and letter
formations and then reflect on their formations compared
with the standard.
Provide daily practice of difficult letter formations in WPRs
until mastery is achieved by the majority of children.
Model evaluating his/her handwriting on a WPR written on
the board. Put a symbol (e.g., a star) beside the best letter
formation and a check beside one that needs improvement.
Teach children to evaluate their own handwriting on WPRs
and put a symbol beside a phonogram they formed well and a
check before one they want to improve.
In small group,
9
9 Reteach letter formation and/or phonogram(s) missed.
9
9 Increase multisensory practice saying and writing the
difficult phonograms to develop motor memory.
9
9 Increase daily practice saying and writing the difficult
phonograms in a few words from their spelling lesson.
 10
Evaluating
Systematic Phonics Evaluation Strategies, cont.
Analyzing Weekly Written Phonogram
Assessment Data
The teacher will…
Select phonograms that children cannot remember,
cannot spell, or cannot form letters correctly for
weekly written assessments.
Evaluate accuracy and letter formations and identify
phonograms and letter formations to reteach in whole
group the following week.
Analyze weekly assessments (on 5/8” lined paper)
to identify children who need additional practice in
small group and phonograms that need to be retaught
in small group.
Use scores from weekly assessments as separate
phonogram and handwriting grades.
Provide independent activities and assignments for
children who mastered phonogram sounds and letter
formation:
9
9 Provide additional word play through rhymes,
manipulating first and last sounds of words to
create new words.
9
9 Provide individual-size phonogram cards for
children to create words they can spell.
9
9 Provide Spalding Series 1 or 2 Leveled Readers
(K-1) or fine literature for children to read
silently.
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
 11
Evaluating
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies
Analyzing
Spelling/Vocabulary Notebooks
The teacher will…
Write a primary spelling/vocabulary notebook to use as a model
for children and for daily notebook checks.
Evaluate (observe) children’s performance during spelling
dictation:
9
9 Ensure that all children say one syllable words by sound(s)
and multisyllable words by syllable.
9
9 Have children use the same lines in their notebooks to write
their words. (This process ensures that notebooks can be
easily checked, and children can read words in unison two
ways: for spelling and for reading.)
Teach children to evaluate their own accuracy and legible
handwriting by using your model on the board. Explain that
proofreading forms the habit of checking for accuracy:
9
9 Model proofreading a child’s notebook; explain how to
correct errors by referring to the model on the board.
9
9 Teach children to pair, share, and repair with a partner
(optional).
9
9 Have children compare notebooks only after they have
become good at proofing their own notebooks.
9
9 Have children correct their own errors before submitting
their notebooks for final checking (this saves teachers’
valuable time checking notebooks).
Evaluate each notebook daily after dictation by putting a small
check in pencil beside each error:
9
9 List words missed by many children for reteaching and
practice.
9
9 Note phonograms, rules, and handwriting features that
require reteaching.
9
9 Note examples of progress toward spelling and marking
accuracy to share with children.
9
9 Erase the checkmarks when the child has corrected each
error.
Reteach, in flexible small groups, sounds or rules for words that
were difficult for children.
 12
Evaluating
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
The teacher will…
Evaluate children who have difficulty writing or segmenting
new or unfamiliar words in syllables:					
9
9 Model correct directionality by standing before the word
written in syllables on the board; place one hand on the
first syllable and the other hand on the second one.
9
9 Reteach syllable structure and syllable types.
9
9 Increase daily practice of reading words for spelling until
children master segmenting sounds and syllables.
Evaluate children’s reading for spelling after daily dictation:
9
9 Ensure that children read one-syllable words by sound and
multisyllable words by syllable.
9
9 Listen for precise pronunciation such as elongated vowels
and those in unaccented syllables, extended consonants,
and words in which Rule 29 applies. (Daily correction of
pronunciation errors improves spelling accuracy on weekly
tests and compositions.)
Evaluate children’s reading for reading after daily dictation:
9
9 Ensure that children read newly-dictated spelling words in
normal speech.
9
9 Ensure that children read previously-dictated words
in normal speech. (Daily evaluation of accurate and
automatic reading improves text reading fluency.)
9
9 Provide more practice for all words that are read slowly.
Provide flexible small-group practice reading for spelling for
children who have difficulty segmenting and blending.
Provide flexible small-group daily practice reading for
reading for children who read slowly. Increase daily practice of
previously-dictated words until children read all high-frequency
words automatically.
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies, cont.
Analyzing
Spelling/Vocabulary Notebooks,
cont.
 13
Evaluating
Examples of Common Errors
Diagnosis Example
Incorrect phonogram(s)
wuz for was;
babe for baby
Inability to apply rule(s) tel for tell; mi for my
Inability to sequentially
process sounds
litle for little
Incorrect homophone
(vocabulary)
see for sea
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies, cont.
Analyzing Daily
Spelling Quiz Data
The teacher will…
Give a daily practice spelling quiz on the following
day after 5 words have been entered in the spelling/
vocabulary notebook.
Analyze spelling errors to refine instruction (see
examples for differentiating phonogram instruction in
this section). Examine work for common types of errors
(see chart below).
Analyze handwriting performance (using the manuscript
handwriting criteria in this section).
Put a tiny check beside each missed word, then return
quizzes; provide specific, immediate feedback; and
reteach as needed:
9
9 Reteach difficult phonograms and/or explain the
rules for the words missed.
9
9 Have children explain the rule (if any), then say the
sound(s), and carefully write the word no more than
three times to strengthen muscle memory. (Writing
the word more often is counter productive because
attention wanders.)
9
9 Have children study words missed for the weekly
test.
 14
Evaluating
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
The teacher will…
Give a weekly test on the 10/15 new spelling/vocabulary
words entered in the notebook each week.
Analyze spelling errors and handwriting performance on the
weekly tests with the same procedure used for practice on
daily quizzes; reteach in whole or small group as needed.
Evaluate children who spell words correctly on daily quizzes
and weekly assessments, but not in their written assignments:
9
9 Increase practice identifying difficult phonograms and
rule explanations for words they missed.
9
9 Increase daily practice of reading words for spelling.
Analyze pacing. When 80 percent of children achieve 90
percent or better on the weekly spelling tests, provide
independent activities for the majority and spend more time
on small-group instruction for the children who still struggle.
Continue to give the weekly test on each successive set of
10/15 words.
Have children frequently read the 10/15 dictated words for
spelling and explain how rules apply in specific words.
Analyzing Weekly
Spelling Assessment Data
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies, cont.
 15
Evaluating
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies, cont.
The teacher will…
Evaluate each child’s grade status on the Spalding
Spelling Class Progress Report form (see Assessing)
to determine progress. For example, if the majority of
children are making steady progress, instruction is
probably at the correct level of difficulty. If only a few
children are not progressing, analyze several of their
monthly tests. Frequently, there will be improvement in
one area, but new errors have occurred. Identifying errors
helps refine instruction. If most children stay at the same
score for several months, identify the reason and provide
solutions.
Analyzing Monthly
Spelling Assessment Data
Spalding Spelling Class Progress Report
Teacher: Year:
School: Grade:
Directions: On about the same day each month, record each child’s grade status score on each
successive Spalding Spelling Assessment List.
Name List 1 List 2 List 3 List 4 List 1 Gain
Problem Solution
Dictation of sections in the
Spelling/Vocabulary Word List is
too slow to introduce new rules
required for spelling more difficult
words.
Follow the Spelling objectives for
the number of words that should
be dictated each week. Practice
using those words in sentences and
assess weekly to monitor progress.
Insufficient daily reading for
spelling from notebooks (both
current and previously taught
words).
Increase daily practice of reading
words for spelling (by sound or
syllable) and reading previously
written words frequently.
Insufficient practice explaining
how the rule governs the
pronunciation or spelling.
Analyze the words children missed
to determine which phonograms
and spelling rules need to be
retaught. Then, reteach the
phonogram(s) and rule(s) that
apply to missed words but never
reteach the Spalding Spelling
Assessment words directly.
 16
Evaluating
Morphology Evaluation Strategies
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty understanding the structure of words:
9
9 Reteach the meaning of vowel and consonant.
9
9 Reteach the meaning of syllable and that each syllable
has a vowel.
9
9 Reteach the function and usage of each part of speech
in oral declarative sentences using words from the
weekly spelling lesson.
9
9 Coach as children orally identify the parts of speech
for spelling words and use selected words in oral
declarative sentences.
9
9 Coach as children compose written sentences that
demonstrate meaning and usage of unfamiliar
spelling words and identify each part of speech.
9
9 Reteach the meanings of base word and suffix as each
occurs in the weekly spelling word list.
9
9 Explain and demonstrate how the suffix changes the
meaning and the part of speech of the base word.
9
9 Coach as children identify the base word or the suffix
in weekly spelling words, and explain how the suffix
may change the meaning and the part of speech.
Provide independent activities for children who understand
the basic structure of words:
9
9 Have these children categorize spelling words into
parts of speech.
9
9 Have them identify selected spelling words that have a
base word and suffix.
Analyzing Knowledge
of Word Structure
Evaluating Spelling Assessment Data, cont.
 17
Evaluating
Evaluating Writing Assessment Data
The Spalding Method writing component is divided into three
main strands: high-frequency vocabulary, sentence construction,
and composition. The writing lesson begins by integrating
vocabulary development with sentence construction. The daily
writing lesson emphasizes the precise use of words that were
introduced in the spelling lesson.
After kindergartners have been taught attributes of sentences
(about three months), they begin writing and reading their
own sentences. They are introduced to the four types of simple
sentences followed by related sentences, and then three basic types
of text structure.
While the children are learning to construct oral and written
sentences, they also learn the names of the parts of speech,
language rules, and some suffixes. They categorize words
according to the jobs these words perform.Having children name,
define,and explain characteristics of a category requires higher-level
thinking.
When kindergartners know and use the attributes of written sentences,
they are ready to learn the concept of related thoughts.They learn to
compose two or three sentences about a single topic.Teachers explain
and demonstrate how to use the writing process to compose different
types of writing.Paragraph construction begins with familiar topics
and,once introduced,continues the rest of the year.
 18
Evaluating
High-Frequency Vocabulary Evaluation Strategies
Evaluating Writing Assessment Data
The teacher will…
Elicit oral responses to check children’s understanding
of high-frequency vocabulary by:
9
9 Having children compose additional oral and
written sentences that clearly demonstrate usage
and meaning of difficult or unfamiliar words in the
Spelling/Vocabulary Word List or in daily reading.
9
9 Allowing time for children to articulate
distinguishing characteristics of similar words, e.g.,
sea/see. Explain and then have children explain
which phonogram is used when they mean a body
of water and which they use to mean to see with
your eyes. Compare the two ee’s with two eyes.
9
9 Having children use these words in oral and, later,
written sentences until mastery is achieved.
Elicit oral responses to check children’s understanding
of English rule structure by:
9
9 Reteaching the rule: Model the application with
familiar words (e.g., Rule 4 in words like me, go,
no, and so), or model the use of capitalization
(Rule 26), or the use of word endings in sentences.
9
9 Allowing time for children to articulate how the
rule applies to words.
9
9 Allowing time for additional practice applying
spelling and language rules until mastered. Use
Word Builder Cards to provide practice of rules for
adding affixes to base words.
9
9 Evaluating skills children need to practice more
frequently.
Analyzing Children’s Use of Oral
Vocabulary
 19
Evaluating
Simple Sentence Construction Evaluation Strategies
Analyzing Daily
Simple Sentence Construction
The teacher will…
Evaluate children’s written simple declarative,
interrogative, exclamatory, and imperative sentences
for attributes: subject and verb, beginning and ending
punctuation, logical order, and precise language.
Maintain student portfolios for children and parents
to see progress.
Note specific errors made by most children, reteach,
and provide additional practice.
Allow time for children to articulate how each
attribute of simple written sentences aids in the
reader’s comprehension of the message.
Allow time for children to reflect on how their writing
has improved compared to last week.
Provide small-group instruction for children who
have difficulty remembering the attributes of simple
sentences and the meaning of unfamiliar spelling
words:
9
9 Reteach the attributes and model orally
composing simple sentences using the
unfamiliar spelling words.
9
9 Coach as children orally compose simple
sentences that demonstrate usage and meaning
of unfamiliar words in small group.
9
9 Encourage children to orally compose additional
simple sentences during the day, and to identify
the new vocabulary in text or printed material.
9
9 As children master letter formation and spelling
of unfamiliar words, coach as they compose
written simple sentences that demonstrate usage
and meaning of unfamiliar words.
 20
Evaluating
Simple Sentence Construction Evaluation Strategies, cont.
Evaluating Writing Assessment Data, cont.
The teacher will…
Provide flexible small-group instruction for children who
have difficulty remembering the attributes of declarative,
interrogative, exclamatory, or imperative sentences:
9
9 Reteach the attributes of declarative, interrogative, then
exclamatory, and final imperative sentences.
9
9 Model orally composing each type of simple sentence using
words from the weekly spelling list.
9
9 Coach as children orally compose each type of simple
sentence.
9
9 Model composing written sentences that demonstrate usage
and meaning of unfamiliar spelling words; then coach as
children compose written sentences that demonstrate usage
and meaning of unfamiliar spelling words using any type of
simple sentence.
Provide independent activities for children who need challenge
by teaching exclamatory sentences and commands.
Examples: “Ice cream is cold!” "Popcorn smells good!"
Examples: "Get the ball." "Roll over." "Eat your food."
Compare all children’s progress each month with previous
sentences in their portfolios; have them articulate and reflect on
the quality of sentences in their portfolios.
Example: “I am getting much better remembering to use
a capital letter at the beginning of each sentence.”
Explain again or reteach concepts or skills that children are not
applying consistently in written sentences. Follow the sequence of
skills presented in the lesson plans (easy to difficult).
Analyzing Daily Simple
Sentence Construction, cont.
 21
Evaluating
Related Sentences Evaluation Strategies
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty composing related sentences:
9
9 Reteach the meaning of related sentences using
family relationships.
9
9 Model again writing two related sentences on the
board, then model writing two sentences that are not
related and explain why two are related and two are
not.
9
9 Coach as children orally compose related sentences
and explain why they are related.
Provide independent activities for children who
understand and can orally compose related sentences:
9
9 Have these children write two related sentences about
another topic, such as a favorite pet or toy.
9
9 Have them explain why the sentences are related.
Analyzing Knowledge
of Related Sentences
 22
Evaluating
Analyzing Knowledge of
Three Types of Paragraphs
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty orally composing informative-narrative,
informative, and narrative paragraphs:
9
9 Reteach the elements of an informative-narrative
first, then, informative, and finally narrative
paragraphs using the Spalding Text Structure posters.
9
9 Model composing an informative-narrative first, then
an informative, and finally a narrative paragraph.
9
9 Coach as children orally compose in small group an
informative-narrative first, then an informative, and
finally a narrative paragraph.
Provide independent activities for children who
understand and can orally compose informative-narrative,
informative, and narrative paragraphs:
9
9 Have these children use spelling words for the week in
single or multiparagraph passages.
9
9 Have them compose single or multiparagraph
passages and incorporate science or social studies
topics or characters.
Paragraph Writing Evaluation Strategies
Evaluating Writing Assessment Data, cont.
 23
Evaluating
Evaluating Reading Assessment Data
Children’s ability to read fluently with comprehension is
dependent on their automatic word recognition, knowledge of
grade-appropriate vocabulary and English writing conventions.
Spend most instructional time on spelling and writing.
However, reading evaluation begins with listening to children’s
oral responses to stories read aloud. It is followed by evaluating
each child’s understanding of text structure and, toward
the middle of the year, monitoring children’s use of three
comprehension strategies (mental actions).
The purpose of literary appreciation lessons is to foster a love of
reading and an appreciation of skillful writing. Observing and
evaluating children’s appreciation of fine literature begins on
Academic Day 4.
The purpose of text structure lessons is to help children focus
on the important elements of narrative, informative, and
informative-narrative writing. Observing and evaluating begins
on Academic Day 2 as you model identifying the author’s
purpose and characters in a story.
The purpose of comprehension strategy lessons is to help
children deliberately use the mental actions to monitor and
adjust their own comprehension while listening and, later,
while reading. Observing and evaluating begins after children
can identify and label the first three mental actions (typically
toward the end of Kindergarten).
 24
Evaluating
Literary Appreciation Evaluation Strategies
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty articulating their reactions and reflecting
on meaningful parts of stories and informative paragraphs
read aloud in whole group.
9
9 Model thinking to redefine each attribute beginning
with precise language. Discuss words, phrases, or
sentences that were read aloud in whole group; explain
why they are examples of attributes of fine literature.
9
9 Coach as children articulate and reflect on new words,
phrases, or sentences that demonstrate the attributes.
Provide independent activities for children who understand
the attributes of fine literature:
9
9 Have children read a decodable book of their choice or
a teacher-selected book.
9
9 Have them identify their favorite part and illustrate the
story.
Analyzing
Literary Appreciation Data
Evaluating Reading Assessment Data, cont.
 25
Evaluating
Fluent and Expressive Reading Evaluation Strategies
Analyzing Fluent and Expressive
Reading Data
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children having
difficulty reading Spalding Series 1 Leveled Readers fluently
and expressively in whole group:
9
9 Reteach words that cause children’s reading to slow
down or stop.
Identify the phonograms and/or rules in the words
that are not pronounced automatically and reteach
those phonograms and/or rules.
Provide more practice reading those words.
9
9 Provide additional practice reading the current and
previously introduced spelling words for reading to
ensure they can read these high-frequency words
automatically.
9
9 Model rereading the Spalding Series 1 Leveled Readers
fluently and expressively; later, model reading literature
books aloud.
9
9 Coach as children reread the Spalding Series 1 Leveled
Readers fluently and expressively; later, have them read
literature books aloud.
9
9 Use the Fluent and Expressive Reading Checklist in
Assessing to continue evaluating their oral reading.
Provide independent activities for children who read fluently
and expressively:
9
9 Have children read other decodable books of their
choice or teacher-selected books.
9
9 Have them explain how reading fluently helps them
understand the story. (They can focus on the message.)
 26
Evaluating
Text Comprehension: Text Structure Evaluation Strategies
Analyzing
Text Structure Data
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty identifying and labeling narrative,
informative, and/or informative-narrative elements:
9
9 Reteach and provide more practice using
the Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension book and/or McCall-Harby,
McCall-Crabbs Book A passages, and literature
selections that clearly demonstrate the elements
of each type of writing.
9
9 Coach as children explain the differences between
the three types of writing.
9
9 Listen to children’s responses as they identify and
label elements in the Spalding Practicing and
Assessing Comprehension book and/or McCall-
Harby, McCall-Crabbs Book A passages, and
later in literature selections.
9
9 Listen to and evaluate children’s answers to
questions that relate to text structure.
9
9 Reteach and provide more practice in response to
text structure questions.
9
9 Evaluate children’s ability to use elements to
defend their choices.
Example: “I believe this is a narrative because it
has characters, setting, and an event."
Provide independent activities for children who
understand the different types of writing:
9
9 Have children read a decodable book of their
choice or a teacher-selected book.
Evaluating Reading Assessment Data, cont.
 27
Evaluating
Text Comprehension: Mental Actions Evaluation Strategies
The teacher will…
Provide flexible, small-group instruction for children
having difficulty identifying and labeling the first three
mental actions:
9
9 Reteach and provide additional practice of mental
actions using the Spalding Practicing and Assessing
Comprehension book and/or literature selections.
9
9 Evaluate children’s answers to basic- or higher-level
thinking (inferential) questions and then:
Reteach how to find answers stated in the passage if
children miss basic questions.
Reteach how to make connections between prior
knowledge and information in the text to infer
answers if children miss inferential questions.
Provide independent activities for children who can
identify, label, and apply the first three mental actions:
9
9 Have children read a decodable book of their choice or
a teacher-selected book.